
Business expansion through training and development

Introduction

It is about helping individuals to gain knowledge, learn new skills
and develop a wide range of attributes. Development makes

Aldi is a leading retailer with over 8,000 stores worldwide. It

employees more adaptable and more able to take on a wider

continues to expand in Europe, North America and Australia. The

range of roles.

Aldi brand is associated with value for money. Its stores provide
customers with a wide range of products. There is an emphasis on

This case study will demonstrate how Aldi’s training and

high quality products and providing excellent value for customers.

development programmes help ensure its employees have the
skills and competencies that the business requires both now and

Aldi’s slogan is ‘spend a little, live a lot’. It works hard to keep

in the future.

prices low for its customers. The company buys large quantities of
products from carefully selected suppliers. Its buyers are experts

Identifying training needs

who choose the best quality products at the most competitive
prices. The savings achieved by sourcing products in this way can

Workforce planning is the process of finding out how a business

be passed on to customers. Aldi keeps costs down in other ways.

will meet its labour requirements both now and in the future. Aldi,

It ensures its operations are as efficient as possible, for example,

like other businesses, needs to predict its future staffing needs

store layouts are kept simple and opening hours focus on the

accurately. It needs to plan for both the number of workers it will

busiest times of the day.

require and the specific skills that the business will need in the
future. The company can then recruit new staff if necessary. It can

Aldi places great importance on how it trains and develops its

also ensure that it has training and development programmes in

employees. Training is the process of providing employees with

place to meet these needs.

the necessary knowledge and skills to perform their tasks and
roles competently. Training not only helps to increase business
efficiency but it can also make staff more motivated by increasing
their job satisfaction. While training is narrowly focused on helping
a company become efficient and effective in the short term,
development is more about building the long-term capabilities of
the workforce.

Aldi identifies future training needs through an ongoing analysis of
company performance in key areas at all levels. For example, the
company monitors the availability of its products to the customer
within its stores. If the level of availability drops below the targeted
level then a programme of training on order accuracy would be
undertaken. It also considers future developments within the
business and within the grocery retail sector in order to predict
both the total numbers of staff it will need and, more crucially, the
skills and competencies that will be required.
Aldi’s rapid expansion means that its current workforce cannot
meet its future staffing requirements. The company will need to
recruit more than 4,000 new members of staff within the next
12 months to meet the requirements of current exceptional sales
growth and new store openings. To attract the best candidates, it
offers industry-leading salaries at all levels.

8

Curriculum topics covered: • Identifying training needs
• On-the-job training • Off-the-job training • Development

ALDI STUDY

29/8/12

10:21

Page 3

To ensure it gets people with the right set of skills, the company
produces clear and detailed job descriptions for each post. These
show the tasks and responsibilities for that position and in turn,
the skills and competencies needed by an individual to succeed in
that role.
Through a process of interview and assessment, managers
identify if candidates have the precise skills and competencies that
the job requires. If the selection process shows that they are
suitable, then they will be recruited and Aldi can be confident that
they will fulfil the challenges of their role.

On-the-job training
Although Aldi expects new recruits to make an immediate
contribution to the business, it also provides training so that they

On-the-job training is training that takes place while employees are

can develop their careers within the company. Aldi has entry levels

actually working. It means that skills can be gained while trainees

for apprentices, store assistants, deputy managers, assistant store

are carrying out their jobs. This benefits both employees and the

managers, trainee store managers and graduate trainee area

business. Employees learn in the real work environment and gain

managers. Aldi organises high-level training for recruits to all

experience dealing with the tasks and challenges that they will

levels. For example, in their first year, graduate recruits receive

meet during a normal working day. The business benefits by

training in all areas of the business. This ranges from training

ensuring that the training is specific to the job. It also does not

in-store to understand how the retail operation works, to regional

have to meet the additional costs of providing off-the-job training

office tasks such as logistics, trading and financial planning.

or losing working time.

All new recruits go through a comprehensive structured training

There are several methods of providing on-the-job training. Four

plan. New employees learn about the philosophy of Aldi and its

frequently used methods are briefly described here:

expectations of them. This is important in making new employees

• Coaching – an experienced member of staff will help trainees

quickly feel part of the Aldi family. This training will be appropriate

learn skills and processes through providing instructions or

to the role, so could be in a store or at an Aldi regional office.

demonstrations (or both).
• Mentoring – each trainee is allocated to an established
member of staff who acts as a guide and helper. A mentor
usually offers more personal support than a coach, although
the terms ‘mentor’ and ‘coach’ are often used interchangeably.
• Job rotation – this is where members of staff rotate roles or
tasks so that they gain experience of a full range of jobs.
• ‘Sitting next to Nellie’ – this describes the process of
working alongside a colleague to observe and learn the skills
needed for a particular process. This can be a faster and more
useful way of learning a job role than studying a written
manual. The colleague is always on hand to answer any
questions or deal with any unexpected problems.
For most on-the-job training at Aldi stores, the store manager acts
as the trainer. A typical format is for the manager to explain a
process to the trainee, then to demonstrate it. The trainee then
carries out the process, while the manager observes. Once the
manager is happy that trainees are competent, they can then
carry out the process unaided. This process is used, for example,
to teach a store assistant how to operate the till and to instruct a
trainee manager how to order stock accurately.

www.thetimes100.co.uk

9

ALDI STUDY

29/8/12

10:21

Page 4

All positions from apprentices through to trainee area managers
follow this type of structured ‘tell, show, do’ training. Trainee area
managers also undergo job rotation. They have the opportunity to
experience all aspects of the business to give them a complete
overview of how Aldi operates. They can then see how each
department and business operation relates to and links with other
parts of the company and other processes.

Off-the-job training
As the name suggests, off-the-job training is provided away from
the immediate workplace. This might be at a specialist training
centre or at a college or at a company’s own premises. This type
of training can be particularly useful for developing transferable
skills that can be used in many different parts of the business. It
may be used, for example, to train employees in the use of new
equipment and new methods or to bring them up to date with
changes in the law. Typical off-the-job training courses offered to
employees by Aldi include:
• recruitment, interviewing and selection
• employment law

Aldi provides training opportunities for young people. The Aldi
apprentice scheme combines on-the-job and off-the-job training.
Apprenticeships are open to 16-18 year olds. Apprentices training as
store assistants also study for an NVQ in Retail Apprenticeship. They
complete store assistant training and gain an NVQ Level 2 in their
first year. They then take a store management training programme
over two years and work for a Level 3 advanced qualification.

• influencing skills
• performance reviews (appraisals)
• Aldi Management System (how to develop and performance
manage people).

The variety seems to suit apprentices. As Sam, an Aldi apprentice
says: ‘The fast pace of the role is really exciting, with lots of
chances to learn new and useful skills. As well as the on-the-job
training, there is also studying towards a recognised qualification

For each aspect of training Aldi decides whether on-the-job or

that I can fit around work.’

off-the-job training is the better option. Off-the-job training may
involve extra costs, such as payments to training organisations. It
also means that staff taking training courses are not at work, so
their jobs have to be covered by others. This can lead to an
increase in payroll costs. However, balanced against these costs
are the gains that Aldi makes from off-the-job training. These
include the benefits of having more motivated staff, greater staff
productivity and employees with better skills and the ability to
provide improved customer service.

Emily, another apprentice, recognises that the programme is a
good opportunity: ‘After attending college I was looking for an
opportunity that would allow me to use my customer service skills
and the Aldi apprenticeship has given me just that. There is a lot
of competition for places, so you really need to want to succeed. I
really feel part of the store team. It can be challenging but it is well
worth it.’
At the end of their apprenticeships, Sam and Emily will have the
knowledge and skills to take on deputy manager or assistant store
manager positions. From there each can rise to become a Store
Manager in the business. Aldi’s current growth means that there are
many opportunities for promotion, so Sam and Emily could soon
join the many others who have been promoted within the business.

Development
Development is not the same as training. Development focuses as
much on personal growth as skills that are directly related to the
job. A development programme is designed to make individuals
more skilled, more flexible in their approach and better qualified for
their chosen careers.
10

www.thetimes100.co.uk

ALDI STUDY

29/8/12

10:21

Page 5

www.aldi.co.uk

Conclusion
Aldi seeks to provide its customers with quality products at prices
that provide value for money. It wants efficient operations, with its
stores staffed by people who are keen and competent. Aldi’s
success is shown by the fact that it is expanding rapidly. It is
opening new stores and experiencing sales growth that requires it
to take on more staff. This means that it needs to combine good
recruitment policies with robust selection processes.
Staff are recruited from school or college into Aldi’s apprenticeship
scheme or directly into stores for positions from store assistant up
Through a development programme, employees can obtain

to trainee Store Manager. Those from university with a 2.1 degree or

transferable qualifications that benefit the individuals concerned as

better are able to apply for the Graduate Area Manager programme.

well as the business. This can have disadvantages for the business,

All recruits are assured of appropriate on-the-job and off-the-job

as it gives workers greater value in the job market. However, Aldi is

training, as well as career development opportunities. Promotion is

willing to take this risk as it believes in providing what is best for its

open to all staff, regardless of the route they choose to join Aldi.

staff. Development options for apprentices include working for
various qualifications. Aldi has a fast-track approach for graduates.

Aldi puts great emphasis on developing its people. Over 85%

Opportunities for graduate recruits at Aldi include secondments to

of Aldi directors have been recruited from within the company.

different international countries to develop all-round expertise.

This commitment to training and development makes Aldi a
business of choice for both ambitious teenagers and top

The Aldi retail placement scheme takes university students on a

graduates. This is shown by its placing in the Top 5 in The Times

one-year placement. This allows the chosen individuals to show

Top 100 Graduate Employers and the Graduate Employer of

what they can offer the business and to find out what the

Choice for 2012 for General Management.

business can offer them. Aldi offers an excellent reward package
for students on a placement, but in return expects trainees to
have enthusiasm, drive and ambition. Successful students get the
opportunity to apply for a place on Aldi’s Area Management
training programme.
To support their development, managers help employees to set
personal goals. These are identified during an appraisal process.
This is when a member of staff sits down with their line manager to
evaluate past and current performance, to consider what skills are
needed going forward and to set targets for the future. This could
involve identifying further training or development opportunities.
1. Describe what is meant by training. (2 marks)
2. Explain the difference between on-the-job and
approaches are used by Aldi. (4 marks)
3. Analyse the similarities and differences between
training and development. Which do you think is most
important to Aldi and why? (6 marks)
4. Evaluate the different ways that Aldi attracts and trains
new staff. Which of these do you think is the most

Exam-style questions

off-the-job training. Explain why you think both training

important route for Aldi? Give reasons for your answer.
(8 marks)

Aldi | Business expansion through training and development

11

ARM STUDY

2/10/12

14:04

Page 2

O P E R AT I O N S

How innovation drives research and development

In return for its technology, ARM receives a licence fee for the

Introduction

original IP from the partner and a royalty on every microchip
Using a laptop computer, Smartphone or iPad has become an

produced. To date, over 20 billion chips containing ARM

essential part of everyday life for many people. Few, however, will

technology have been manufactured. ARM relies on the high levels

be aware of how the technology that drives these tools is created.

of creativity, innovation and knowledge of its people to continue to

ARM is the world's leading semiconductor intellectual property (IP)

develop new ideas and provide customers with the benefits of

supplier. Intellectual property is that which originates in the mind

emerging technology. Its R&D activity is collaborative and

such as ideas, literary works, music and designs. ARM’s business

generates innovation in other companies. For example, leading

model is not typical. It does not own any factories but instead

brand Smartphones contain ARM technology that has been

designs and licenses its technology to a network of partners who

incorporated into chips manufactured by a variety of

carry out the manufacturing. Over 900 licenses have been sold to

semiconductor companies. In turn, they use diverse software and

more than 250 different partner companies. These include the

applications running on various operating systems such as

world's leading semiconductor and systems companies, such as

Android. This sharing of information contributes to increasing the

Samsung, NVIDIA, Texas Instruments and Qualcomm.

industry’s knowledge base.
This case study will look at the processes of research and

From its founding in 1990 in Cambridge in the UK, it has grown to

development at ARM and show how these support the company’s

become a major developer of digital electronic products. The

leading market position.

company has offices around the world, including design centres in
the UK, USA, India, Scandinavia, France and China.
ARM is a Research & Development (R&D) focused business. Its
‘products’ are intangible and cover a diverse range of applications.
They are used in everything from sensors to servers. Mobile
phones, tablet computers, washing machines, car braking
systems and network routers all use ARM technology.

New product development (NPD)
New products may stem from invention or innovations. Invention is
the formulation of new ideas for products or processes. Innovation is
the practical application of new inventions into marketable products
or services. Product development may follow different routes:
• A product-orientated approach is where a company develops a
new product. It then seeks a market and ‘pushes’ the product
out to that market. This might be to solve a problem or to take
advantage of an opportunity. An example could be developing
new functions for mobile phones. This is a higher risk approach
as the company will carry the costs of development without
knowing what the returns might be.
• A market-orientated approach develops a product to meet a
known current or future customer need. This need would have
been identified through market research. Developing a product
to specific requirements may reduce costs and increase the
probability of product success. Having a market waiting to buy
the product gives assurance of return on the investment.

12

Curriculum topics covered: • New product development • Innovation
• Research • Development

ARM STUDY

29/8/12

10:22

Page 3

• Responding to competitor products allows a business to catch
up or overtake business rivals. This development may lead to a
better product.
• Changes in technology may lead to the development of a more
effective product or one which sets a new benchmark for the
market. For example, the Amazon Kindle is changing the way
people read books.
ARM adopts a route of innovation to transfer its technology into
products customers want and need. Its technology supports three
key types of chips:

A - class processors
(applications)

Research
These are equivalent to PC

The research process involves inquiry into and discovery of new

processors; these are ‘high end’

ideas to solve a problem or create an opportunity. ARM invests

and are used in everything from

around £140 million per year into its research programmes. As a

smartphones to servers and

knowledge-based research and development business, the majority

supercomputers where multi-

of costs are associated with the company’s high quality employees.

tasking is needed.
ARM’s corporate R&D
R - class processors are
‘real-time’

This looks 5-10 years into the

These are embedded in things

future for new ways to do

and do only one job, such as

things. It also considers future

the overall braking control on

products.

a car.
M - class processors
(micro controllers)

These are general purpose and

ARM’s advanced product

This is concerned with how to

development

apply new technology 3-5 years

programmable. They are used for

in the future.

a single less complex task or a
larger process. These are used

ARM’s product development

This is focused on new products
for launch in 1-2 years.

in, for example, washing machine
programmes or on the ABS
brakes on each wheel of a car.

ARM’s R&D is predominantly market-orientated. It is influenced by
feedback from hundreds of customers – and their customers –

ARM’s product development also takes various external factors

from different industries and with different needs. ARM employs a

into account, for example, the need to develop low carbon

‘Push/Pull’ model. The push is where ARM puts its latest

products, increase energy security and address impacts on global

developments out to manufacturers to drive new technical

warming. In addition, meeting global economic challenges is also

innovations. The pull reflects what customers and consumers are

high on ARM’s agenda. For example, developing countries such

asking for, i.e. market demand. ARM’s R&D team talks to people

as Brazil and China are becoming more affluent and buying more

at every level within key industries to establish what they need and

consumer electronics.

what demand there is for different products in order to ensure
products are customer-orientated.

Other factors affecting ARM include the customer’s desire for
greater computing mobility, lower power consumption and

External influences also affect ARM’s research. For example,

increased battery life. Consumers are also looking to ‘cloud’

energy efficiency is high on the public agenda. R&D into low

technology, for example, in mobile phone apps, to provide remote

power techniques has always been a key focus for ARM. The

access to virtual storage and software. This provides convenience

microprocessor market is now focused on evaluating the benefits

and lower cost. ARM’s main technical driver is power efficiency,

of similar products across competitors. For example, which has

making microchips smaller whilst increasing their performance. The

lowest power, highest performance (speed) and the smallest scale

smallest processors are now the size of human hair or crumbs.

(which is vital for mobile devices).

www.thetimes100.co.uk

13

ARM STUDY

29/8/12

10:22

Page 4

Typically projects take around 18-24 months. However, the
Cortex-M0+ had a relatively short timescale. Initial conception of
the idea was in December 2010. The project team was set up in
April 2011 and delivery to the customer was in February 2012 –
just 10 months of development time after the specification was
finalised. The ARM team involved is proud of achieving completion
to such a tight timescale.
The project path followed a clearly defined structure:
• The idea was generated via the feedback from product
managers and the marketing managers.
• An outline product specification was devised by working with
the lead partner Freescale.
• The project team of three key people including a Project
Manager was created. The project team determined the

Development

required team size, estimated schedule, agreed stages and
milestones to meet customer requirements. The project

Development involves transforming ideas into a product fit for

approval also included deciding how Cortex-M0+ would fit into

market. From numerous ideas at the research stage, ARM will

the existing ARM ‘roadmap’ (or timetable) of products already

take only a few with potential into the development stage. The key

underway and planned for the future.

elements of the development process include:
• A product brief – identifying what market need it fills. To
produce a product brief, ARM works with around 1,000
companies. These companies may be ARM customers,
competitors and collaborators all at the same time. ARM’s
engineers talk to partners who make the microchips to
establish what is possible technically and its market-focused
people identify what the market is asking for.
• A product specification – outlining the main features, benefits
and costs. ARM combines this feedback and establishes
priority needs. These are then evaluated to focus on the
application which will lead to a deliverable product.
• A process of evaluating alternative solutions – through

ARM’s typical project process gives opportunity for lead partners
to add their influence or interact with the product development
team. This might include changing the specification or having early
access to the product for testing. Freescale was given access to
Cortex-M0+ at the beta design stage. This enabled them to
develop a prototype which could be demonstrated at conferences
and to key customers. This generated early interest in the product
and reduced the time to market, which increases the revenue
potential for ARM and Freescale.

Challenges and benefits of R&D
The challenges of a typical R&D process include:

computer modelling, samples or prototypes. ARM will select

• large costs – of people, time and equipment

lead partners for specific projects. The partners’ R&D teams

• long timescales – for example in the pharmaceutical industry it

then work with ARM’s R&D team to develop the initial idea.
• A sequence of testing – to check the product meets

can take as long as 10-20 years to complete full testing
• high risk – difficulties in anticipating changing market and

requirements. Once tested, the design is then licensed to the

consumer needs over the duration of R&D projects, which

partners to manufacture, on which ARM receives royalties.

leads to uncertain outcomes.

The development of ARM’s Cortex-M0+ processor, which was
released in early 2012, is a world-leading innovation. It has the
lowest energy consumption of any processor and generates low
carbon. The Cortex-M0+ (M class) is a very simple processor.
However, its profile reflects the concept of ‘machine to machine
communication’. It is believed that this is the next major step in
technology. For example, it could automatically control a fridge’s
temperature depending on whether it is full or empty.
14

www.thetimes100.co.uk

ARM STUDY

29/8/12

10:22

Page 5

www.arm.com

ARM’s approach to R&D delivers significant competitive advantage.
Its unique, world-leading products and technology enhance the
business’ reputation and ongoing research generates opportunities
which keep its product pipeline strong. ARM’s business model
enables the business to gain the potential to earn future income
over many years from licensing its intellectual property.

Conclusion
R&D supports invention and innovation. ARM, as a marketorientated business, relies on innovation to maintain its marketleading position in an industry focused on advancements in
technology. Through the use of feedback, from both technical
experts and customers, ARM ensures its product development
ARM meets these challenges and reduces the potential risk of its
projects by:
• working with lead partners to understand what is technically possible
• listening to what its customers and their customers are
asking for
• managing timescales by adjusting the team size and ensuring
the right skills are in place in order to deliver on time.
Challenges to R&D at ARM are mainly technical or economic.
Moore’s Law describes the shrinking process of technology. Moore's

reflects market demands. Its partnership approach reduces risk
whilst minimising the time it takes to get a product to market.
ARM’s ongoing recruitment cycle helps ensure it has employees with
the required specialist skills and competencies to maintain its position
in the market. This is an ongoing challenge due to the complexity of
the work. 95% of ARM’s workforce is made up of graduates, with
around 70% of these being educated to Masters degree level or
higher. Although entry levels are high, the innovative nature of the
work offers a highly creative and rewarding environment.

Law is named after Intel co-founder Gordon E. Moore and predicts
that the number of transistors on an integrated circuit (and therefore
its performance and capability) will double approximately every two
years. The law is used in the semiconductor industry to guide longterm planning and to set targets for research and development.
However, it is not possible to shrink things forever and the smaller
technology gets, the more complex microchips become. As
technology becomes more complex, ARM requires more people to
carry out the work. As chips get more complex, the skills required
for the work are more intricate. This human element becomes a real
challenge for ARM due to the specialist nature of the work teamed
with a global skills shortage. It also brings challenges of
communication between stakeholders because of the mix of
geography, culture and time zones within which ARM operates.

1. Describe the difference between invention and innovation.
(2 marks)
especially for technology-driven organisations like ARM.

ongoing recruitment and offers internships each year to attract the

(4 marks)

best skills. It has employed around 400-500 people in the last
year. ARM provides an exciting, collaborative and team-based
environment. Training for new graduates involves rotation across

3. Analyse the challenges businesses face when undertaking
large-scale research and development. (6 marks)
4. Evaluate how far its partnership approach to research and

several projects to develop skills rapidly. Although needing very

development gives ARM a competitive advantage.

high levels of skills to enter the business, once in the organisation,

(8 marks)

Exam-style questions

2. Explain the importance of new product development,
ARM has a continual challenge in recruiting skilled people. It has

ARM people are highly employable.
ARM | How innovation drives research and development

15

CIMA STUDY

29/8/12

10:25

Page 2

FINANCE

Decision making techniques

Introduction

CIMA, the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants, is the
world’s leading professional body of management accountants.

A business aims to generate value for its owners, customers and

CIMA-trained management accountants help to lead the process

other stakeholders. It must decide how to combine valuable

of strategy formation in a business. Strategy is the plan for

resources – typically buildings and equipment, materials, people

achieving objectives. However, strategy only points the way. Many

and knowledge – in such a way that the value of the output

decisions – large and small – must be made. Management is all

exceeds the costs of the input.

about decision making and management accountants play a vital
role in providing the crucial evidence that helps managers to make

As resources flow into or out of a business, information flows too.

the right decisions.

Much of this information leaves a footprint in the form of financial
data as the activities along a business’ value chain result in financial

Detecting, monitoring and evaluating risk is a very important

outcomes. These are reported in financial statements including the

element of this process. Management accountants use their

cash flow and income statements as well as the formal balance

accounting know-how to factor risk into decisions to help senior

sheet. Traditional accounting is concerned with reporting on a

managers make realistic plans. The effectiveness of this depends

business in financial terms about its past performance.

on good communication. Even the best information has little value
if not received by the right staff in the right format at the right time.

Management accountants go beyond this to prepare both financial
and non-financial information to support the business. They

Types of decisions

combine the relevant expertise of a traditional professionally
qualified accountant with an understanding of the drivers of cost,

A business continually makes decisions at all levels. Think of a

risk and value in a business. This enables them to provide analysis

retailer such as Next. To keep the brand’s high profile position, its

and insights which are used to improve future performance.

managers have to make many decisions. Each major strategic
decision leads to tactical decisions, which break down into
operational decisions.
Decisions are broadly taken at three levels:
• Strategic decisions are big choices of identity and direction.
Who are we? Where are we heading? These decisions are
often complex and multi-dimensional. They may involve large
sums of money, have a long-term impact and are usually taken
by senior management.
• Tactical decisions are about how to manage performance to
achieve the strategy. What resources are needed? What is the
timescale? These decisions are distinctive but within clearer
boundaries. They may involve significant resources, have
medium-term implications and may be taken by senior or
middle managers.

16

Curriculum topics covered: • Types of decisions • Decision making
• Decision trees • Ratio analysis

CIMA STUDY

29/8/12

10:25

Page 3

• Operational decisions are more routine and follow known rules.
How many? To what specification? These decisions involve

Once a decision is made and implemented it needs careful monitoring
to ensure it keeps on track and any problems are detected early.

more limited resources, have a shorter-term application and
can be taken by middle or first line managers.

The Electricity Supply Board (ESB) in Ireland faced the challenge
of reducing its costs from €250m to €200m over five years.

Imagine Next is planning to expand its product range. Its decisions

A team including management accountants was formed to break

would involve all three levels.

down costs and identify waste. The team discovered that ESB
was carrying the costs of electrical faults caused by external
building and construction companies. Meanwhile the ESB

Strategic
decisions

technicians were over-burdened with paperwork. The team
simplified and centralised this within a designated administration
team. This meant the technical staff had more time to give a
faster, flexible response to faults and to diagnose their causes.

Tactical
decisions

Major savings followed as faults plummeted by 75% and costefficiency at the company’s call centre significantly improved.
Some operational decisions can be made mainly from experience

Operational
decisions

and based on an assessment of circumstances. More complex
decisions need a systematic and structured approach. This is
where decision-making models help.

All decisions depend on information. The key is to get the right

Decision trees

information to the right people at the right time. For example,

Most business problems may potentially have more than one

management accountants at Shell, the global oil and gas

solution. Each choice can lead to varying outcomes, some more

company, have been improving the way the company deals with

likely than others. To illustrate this, consider the decision faced by

the strategic and operational data about its global energy projects

Prospect plc, a (fictitious) property development business.

to improve strategic planning.

The company owns a town centre building site. This could be sold
now for an estimated £1.6m. Alternatively the site could be

The company brought together data from 1,200 projects and

developed with shops and a restaurant at a cost of £1.5m.

opportunities across 40 countries into a single system. Bringing the

The property could then be sold for £4m - provided that a bypass

information together was a complex task due to the size of the

proposal is rejected by the local council. The odds of the bypass

company’s operations. However, the system has helped to define

being rejected are judged at about 75:25 due to environmental

strategies and provide greater insight and detail to the Executive

objections. If, however, the bypass were to be built, much tourist

Committee and Board. This has given greater clarity on the

trade would be lost and the value of the development would only be

business’ current and potential performance and highlighted where

£2m. Which choice should Prospect plc make? A decision tree is a

the company should allocate resources. To date, the system has

useful tool when analysing choices of this kind.

helped Shell to increase net present value by over 15%.

How are decisions made?
Management accountants use their skills alongside hard
information to support decision making. Through intelligent analysis
of information, they can generate alternative solutions and match
these to the larger strategy. Each alternative can then be evaluated
for its contribution towards objectives, taking into account:
• the timescale: money received in the future being worth less
than money received today
• the risk: factoring in the probability of under- or overperformance (also called negative or positive variance).
www.thetimes100.co.uk

17

CIMA STUDY

29/8/12

10:25

Page 4

A decision tree is an outcome and probability map of the scenario.

Ratio analysis
Businesses generate a huge amount of data. Management

Decision tree

accountants can use a number of the company’s key accounting
statements to extract greater meaning from this information.
The income statement sets out the total sales revenue and
subtracts the costs of generating that revenue to give operating
profit. This is the surplus earned by the normal operations of the
company and tells us most about underlying business performance.
To continue to use the earlier illustrative example, Prospect plc is
expanding rapidly as it builds a commercial property portfolio
£1.6m

consisting mainly of shops and offices. The company receives rents
and also benefits from any profits when it sells property and sites.
Prospect plc - Summarised income statement for year ending

There are three possible outcomes to this scenario, each of which

31 March 2012 (against previous year for comparison)

can be given a financial value.
Outcome

Probability

Estimated value

Outcome 1 – the site

The development

A 75% chance of

is developed and the

value is £4m.

receiving £4m is

bypass is rejected.

However, there is

'worth' £4m X 0.75 =

only a 75% chance

£3m

Sales revenue

(less) Expenses
(equals) Operating
profit

£m 2012 £m 2011
120
80

105

15

From products/
services sold

60 E.g. costs, overheads

20

of this occurring.
Outcome 2 – the site

There is a 25%

If the bypass goes

is developed and the

chance of receiving

ahead it is ‘worth’

bypass goes ahead.

only £2m

£2m x 0.25 = £0.5m

The balance sheet (or statement of financial position) shows the
wealth of a company at a particular date. It lists the company's
assets (what it owns) followed by its liabilities (what it owes) – the
difference being the net assets. Assets may be current, such as

Outcome 3 – the site

Undeveloped, the

cash, or fixed, such as property or equipment. This value

is sold undeveloped.

site is worth £1.6m

represents the shareholders' equity – the value in the company
that the shareholders actually own.

To calculate the possible yield of developing the site, the values of
outcomes 1 and 2 are combined. The cost of development is then
subtracted: £3m + £0.5m - £1.5m = £2m
This compares to the value of selling the undeveloped site at only
£1.6m. On this basis, depending on its attitude to risk and the likely
timescales, the company is likely to build the shops and restaurant.
Decision trees encourage managers to look at a range of options
rather than relying on ‘gut feeling’. However, they are only as
accurate as the data on which they are based. This data is usually
based on estimates. They do also run the risk of over-simplifying a
problem particularly where human or other external factors are
involved. Other analysis tools can supplement the decisionmaking process.
18

www.thetimes100.co.uk

CIMA STUDY

29/8/12

10:25

Page 5

www.cimaglobal.com

Prospect plc - Balance sheet/statement of financial position as at 31 March 2012
£m 2012

£m 2011

135

80

Current assets

75

45

Current liabilities

60

25

E.g. short term loan, suppliers’ bills

Net current assets (or working capital)

15

20

Current assets less current liabilities

150

100

Non-current liabilities

70

30

E.g. mortgages, pension fund

Net assets

80

70

(Total assets - current liabilities) less non-current liabilities

Total shareholders' equity

80

70

Fixed (non-current) assets

Total assets (current plus fixed) less current liabilities

This looks as if Prospect plc has expanded very fast indeed – but how

The chart shows every sign of a firm that has expanded too quickly:

strong is its performance? Accounting ratios allow different pieces of

• sales have increased by an impressive 50% in one year

financial data to be compared. Analysing some key ratios helps to

• however, profitability has halved

explore behind the figures and offer strong clues for the business to

• liquidity has weakened while gearing is more risky at

steer towards its objectives (previous year data in brackets):

Return on Capital Employed (ROCE)
This is a measure of profitability. ROCE compares the level of profit
made to the value of the capital invested in the business.
= operating profit/(equity + non-current liabilities)
= 15/(80 + 70) = 10% (20%)

nearly 50%.
The result is a danger signal! Management accountants investigate
this sort of data in order to alert managers to worrying trends, as
well as to possible opportunities.

Conclusion
Management accountants use complex business data to help

Profit margin
Another profitability ratio, profit margin, identifies what percentage
of the revenue remains as profits after all costs have been paid.
= operating profit/sales
= 15/120 = 12.5% (25%)

businesses identify critical points and isolate weak and underperforming systems. It can also uncover opportunities that lie
hidden under routines and processes.
CIMA-trained management accountants work at all levels in a
business and partner with managers across various business

Current ratio
This is a measure of liquidity i.e. the ability of a firm to pay its short
term debts.

Gearing
The gearing ratio shows how much of a firm’s capital is from
long-term loans, which must be paid back regularly with interest.
The more highly geared a firm is, the greater the risk it faces.

advantage that is resistant to copying by competitors.

1. List two of the types of decisions that are made by
managers. (2 points)
2. Explain the factors that need to be taken into account
when making decisions. (4 points)
3. Analyse the arguments for and against the use of
decision trees. (6 points)
4. Evaluate the use of accounting ratios when making

= non-current liabilities/(equity + non-current liabilities)
= 70/(80 + 70) x 100 = 46.6% (30.0%)

CIMA | Decision making techniques

Exam-style questions

= current assets/current liabilities
= 75/60 = 1.25 (1.8)

functions. This can become a real source of competitive

strategic decisions. (8 points)

19

CMI STUDY

29/8/12

10:25

Page 2

PEOPLE

Developing the skills for managing change

Introduction

The products and services CMI provides support the development
of managers and leaders in both the public and private sector.

Change is something that happens in businesses all of the time.

This case study illustrates how CMI supports the development of

Change can occur in an organisation’s internal or external

effective managers. Effective managers are vital when

environment. As a result, this process of change is constant.

implementing change within a business.

Change management looks at the drivers of change in the
business environment. Effective managers are proactive in creating
solutions to improve the organisation’s performance. They must
then manage employees through the change process. It is in the
interest of managers to try to predict the changes that are likely to
take place. In other words, they have to plan and drive change
initiatives. This involves managing the change process and making
it part of an organisation’s strategy. Strategies help a business
achieve its aims and objectives. This then helps businesses to
develop in a more focused way to fit the environment in which it
operates, whilst facing new challenges with more certainty.
Organisations require skilled and well-qualified managers and leaders
to drive change initiatives and effectively manage employees through
the process. The only chartered professional body within the UK
dedicated to creating high quality standards for management and
leadership is the Chartered Management Institute (CMI). It has
around 90,000 members and 400 business members and has
been providing advice that supports individuals and businesses for

The core purpose of CMI is to increase the number of

more than 60 years.

professionally qualified managers. This is vital because within ten
years the UK will need to fill nearly one million new management
and leadership roles. These new managers will face many different
economic and social challenges. These challenges must be
proactively managed to anticipate where and when changes within
the organisation may be necessary. To meet these challenges they
will require a range of management and leadership skills and
qualifications. To ensure that schools and colleges are able to
shape and develop future managers and leaders, CMI has created
Campus CMI. The resources provided by Campus CMI help to
deliver management qualifications. These are designed to help
develop talented individuals who are able to manage the process
of change effectively.

20

Curriculum topics covered: • What causes change? • Managing change
• Barriers to change • Evaluating the management of change

CMI STUDY

29/8/12

10:25

Page 3

Every change strategy will involve setting objectives. It is
important, therefore, to constantly evaluate change programmes.
By doing this it is possible to monitor whether changes have
helped an organisation to improve the way it meets its
business objectives.
Serco is one of the world’s leading service and outsourcing
companies. It employs more than 70,000 people and helps
governments to improve services. In 1994 Serco took over
management of HMP and YOI Doncaster, a category ‘B’ remand
centre in South Yorkshire. The prison had faced many challenges
in recent years. For example, the prison inspection report identified
a number of areas where improvements could be made. The

What causes change in a business?

report rated the prison at Performance Level 2, where Level 4 is
the highest and Level 1 the lowest. Staff morale was low, with a

Every organisation faces challenges from within the business. For

high turnover of first-line managers. To address these issues

example, the internal environment might be affected by

Serco decided to use CMI’s programme of management training

inefficiency, changes in the workforce or high levels of staff

and qualifications. CMI training provides managers with the

absenteeism. Organisations also face many challenges in their

knowledge and skills required to implement changes to improve

external environment. These might include legislation that sets

the centre’s performance.

new standards, advances in technology or changes in the market
or the economy.

Managing change

To meet these challenges, managers must anticipate and plan for

Change is inevitable and needs to be handled effectively. To

effective improvements to the organisation’s processes. On the

remain competitive organisations need to continually look for more

one hand, this may involve change management. This requires

efficient and effective ways to operate. Change management is

leaders who have the tools or structures that keep any change

therefore high on the agenda for many organisations.

effort under control. The goal with change management is to
minimise the impacts of the change. On the other hand, this may

Managing change involves a transition from A to B. As this takes

involve change leadership. This involves supporting the change

place, managers need to handle the challenges that may come up

process. Leaders need to have the vision to change an

during the process. At the forefront of this is the setting of change

organisation. To do this they need to harness the driving forces of

objectives. They then have to work out the best way to achieve

change in order to transform an organisation.

these objectives.

Change Management

Change Management

Change Leadership

A
Keeping changes
under control

Supporting change to
transform the business

B
Handling all problems during the process

Every organisation is a complicated system so managing change
Change affects the decisions that an organisation must make in a

is not necessarily an easy process. For example, there will be a

variety of ways. Human resource planning is an important aspect

number of different interdependent parts affecting the whole

of the change management process. This helps to ensure that the

organisation. Changes in technology could have an impact on

workforce can meet the required changes. For example, this might

working procedures, the structure of the organisation and its

involve retraining to develop new skills to meet the changing

people. As leaders manage change, they have to manage the

needs of consumers. Alternatively, a business might have to invest

different inter-related parts of the organisation. The ability to

in new production methods designed to improve efficiency.

manage these parts well is therefore a vital skill for managers.

www.thetimes100.co.uk

21

CMI STUDY

29/8/12

10:25

Page 4

As planning takes place a time frame should be drawn up. Good
communication ensures transparency when implementing
changes. This can help motivate employees as they feel included
in the process. Controlling the process is important as it helps to
reduce conflict. Reviewing the process ensures that change
objectives are being achieved.
CMI qualifications provide managers with the skills and
competencies required to plan, implement, control and review the
change process. For example, at HMP & YOI Doncaster, having
identified areas of weakness within the prison, it was important
that managers could identify solutions that could bring about
change to create improvements. Training by CMI helped managers
Managing change involves making decisions at different levels.

to respond to issues in an imaginative and flexible way. It also

These include:

provided managers with the opportunity to take qualifications that

• Strategic decisions - major decisions affecting the whole of an

would improve their career development.

organisation.
• Tactical decisions - at departmental level to work towards
achieving change objectives.
The way in which decisions are communicated and carried out
varies depending on the style of leadership or the culture of the
organisation. There are four main methods:
• ‘Total imposed package’ which comes from the top, covering
the whole organisation and is implemented in one go.
• ‘Imposed piecemeal initiative’ where change is imposed but in
stages.
• ‘Negotiated total package’ where the aim is to seek a package
of change via negotiations with the staff.
• ‘Negotiated piecemeal package’ where there is a gradual
implementation of change through a series of negotiations with
the workforce.

Barriers to change
Communication plays a key role in the process of change.
Managers and leaders need to identify effective communication

There can often be barriers to change. These can include:

channels through which to reach the appropriate stakeholders. This

• the culture of an organisation resisting the power structure

must happen at every stage in the change process. Employees

• managers feeling threatened by the process of change

need to understand the reasons for change. They may want to ask

• resistance from employees

questions to clarify how they can support the process of change.

• a lack of understanding about why change is to take place
• a lack of communication or trust
• employees fearing the unknown.

Planning

Effective managers take barriers to change into account. They do
this during the planning stage of the change programme. For
Review

Implementation

example, the culture of an organisation can be a barrier to
change. The culture is the way in which employees work through
custom and practice, reflecting the norms of an organisation. This

Control

can makes employees rigid in their approach to their work which
could create resistance to change if not managed effectively.

22

www.thetimes100.co.uk

CMI STUDY

29/8/12

10:25

Page 5

www.managers.org.uk

Removing resistance is a vital role for managers. To minimise

One method of evaluating the process of change is through key

resistance an effective manager will communicate clear objectives.

performance indicators (KPIs). These monitor how well parts of an

This will help everybody to get involved in the process and enable

organisation are working towards fulfilling business objectives. For

them to understand why change is necessary. Communication

example, if an objective was to increase productivity, output can

also helps to avoid rumours. Change can be a sensitive process.

be measured and then compared to output data from before the

Employees need to feel that they have sufficient resources to carry

change programme. This helps to establish if it has increased.

out any changes. Some staff may need retraining. Involving
employees at each stage helps to create support for the

Evaluating the outcomes helps to keep the process of change

change process.

moving forward. For example, if the original strategy needs to be
revised, it allows managers to make decisions that enable future

Working within a culture of change can have a positive effect on

processes of change to be more effective.

an organisation. For example, it may support the process of Total
Quality Management (TQM). It also encourages employees to look

The changes that took place at HMP & YOI Doncaster were

forward to the process of change as the benefits have been

striking. After the CMI training and development, staff morale

made clear.

and managers’ confidence grew. They started to think more
strategically about how to overcome challenges. First-line

There were a number of barriers to change within HMP & YOI

manager turnover fell significantly. This was because the issues

Doncaster. These included low staff morale, a high turnover of

identified in inspection reports had been tackled. Managers were

front line managers and a limited budget to support the process of

able to approach challenges in a completely different way. They

change. CMI training helped the managers at the centre to

developed a better understanding of leadership and management,

overcome these barriers. CMI qualifications encouraged managers

and of their own strengths and development needs as leaders.

to put their ideas into practice to make a positive difference to the

The programme helped to reduce costs and retain talent.

centre’s performance.

Ultimately, it enabled individuals to contribute effectively to the
setting and fulfilling of the organisation’s objectives.

Conclusion
Organisational change takes place for a number of reasons. Often
this is because of changes in the internal and external
environment. Organisations implement changes to increase the
effectiveness of the business. Change can be a complex process
and there may be barriers to overcome. This is why implementing
change programmes within an organisation requires effective
managers. CMI training and development ensures that managers
have the skills and competencies required to manage their team
through a process of change. It enables them to deal with the
change process and to monitor and evaluate change. This helps
to reduce possible resistance to change and establish if the
change objectives were achieved.

Evaluating the management of change
results of the change programme. This involves relating the
changes to the original strategy and objectives. If changes are not
evaluated it will be difficult for managers to determine how well
they managed the process. Monitoring and review will also help
them to understand where further improvements may be required.
If, for some reason, the change process has not been successful,

that might cause change in the business environment.
(2 marks)
2. Explain two benefits of having well trained managers
when managing change. (4 marks)
3. Using an example, analyse why individual employees
might resist the process of change. (6 marks)
4. Evaluate why an organisation might want to create a

Exam-style questions

As change takes place, it is important to monitor and evaluate the

1. Describe one internal factor and one external factor

culture of change. (8 marks)

managers can evaluate why the change process has failed.

CMI | Developing the skills for managing change

23

ENTERPRISE-RENT-A-CAR STUDY

29/8/12

10:25

Page 2

MARKETING

Marketing and product strategies for growth

Enterprise’s ability to keep the customer at the centre of

Introduction

everything it does depends on the skills and commitment of its
As an organisation develops a strategy, it is not making short-term

employees. The main focus for Enterprise is to find new ways to

decisions. Instead, it is creating a pathway that leads to a long term

provide real solutions for people and businesses with

goal. Strategic managers have to make many decisions. For example,

transportation problems. A focus on customer service is the

they have to differentiate their activities from their competitors. This

driving force behind the business. For example, customers benefit

means making their products and services distinctive and different

from a local pick-up service to take them to the branch to collect

from those of rivals, creating a unique selling point (USP) that, in turn,

their car. It is this level of customer service that makes Enterprise

strengthens its brand. They also have to consider the scope of their

different from its competitors.

activities. For example, should they simply operate in one market or
should they enter a range of different markets? If they do enter

Ansoff’s matrix

different markets, how should they enter them?
According to the Chartered Institute of Marketing, ‘Marketing is
This case study illustrates how Enterprise Rent-A-Car has
expanded its operations beyond its core business of car hire. The
case study uses Ansoff’s matrix to illustrate how it has developed
its strategies to improve and grow the business, creating new
products and extending its services into new markets.

the management process responsible for identifying, anticipating
and satisfying consumer requirements profitably’. To do this,
organisations require a marketing strategy. A marketing strategy is
something that affects every part of an organisation. It is about
using everything that a business does to create value for others.
This includes customers but it also benefits employees and

More than 55 years ago, in 1957, Enterprise was founded by Jack
Taylor, an entrepreneur, in Missouri, USA. Starting with just seven
cars he invested his money and ideas into Executive Leasing,

shareholders. The main purpose of a marketing strategy is to
set out the means by which agreed marketing objectives are to
be achieved.

which later became Enterprise. Since then the company has
become the largest car rental company in North America, and
arguably the world, with annual revenues of $14.1 billion and
68,000 employees in 2011. Enterprise Rent-A-Car is an
internationally recognised brand, operating within the United
States, Canada, the UK, Ireland and Germany. It currently has
more than 7,000 rental offices in five countries.
However, as the company has developed it has maintained the
approach and feel of a smaller business. In fact, Enterprise is still a
privately-owned business, with three generations of the Taylor family
involved in managing the organisation. Even though Enterprise is a
big company, it is run like a small business. Its branches are
decentralised. This means that local managers have the freedom to
make decisions based on the needs of each location.

24

Curriculum topics covered: • Ansoff’s matrix • Market development
• Product development • Diversification

ENTERPRISE-RENT-A-CAR STUDY

2/10/12

14:06

Page 3

This matrix suggests four alternative marketing strategies:
a) Market penetration - involves selling more established products
into existing markets, often by increased promotion or price
reductions or better routes to market, for example online.
b) Product development - involves developing new products or
services and placing them into existing markets.
c) Market development - entails taking existing products or
services and selling them in new markets.
d) Diversification - involves developing new products and putting
them into new markets at the same time. Diversification is
considered the most risky strategy. This is because the
business is expanding into areas outside its core activities and
There are many types of marketing objectives. For example, these
might include:
• increasing market share

experience as well as targeting a new audience. It also has to
bear the costs of new product development.
Enterprise has focused most of its growth strategies on market

• growing sales/turnover

development, product development and diversification. These are

• enhancing the strength of the brand

highlighted in the following sections.

• creating loyal customers
• managing costs effectively, thus increasing profitability.
A common marketing objective is to achieve growth. There are
a number of ways in which organisations can grow. For example,
they might expand internally. This is known as organic growth.
A quicker but higher risk option is external or inorganic growth.
This involves acquiring or merging with another business.
One positive benefit of growth is that it helps a business to reduce
costs through economies of scale. These include:
• efficiencies arising from use of new technologies
• improved buying power as it can bulk buy at lower costs
• the ability to recruit more specialists to improve decision making.
By lowering costs, an organisation increases its profitability and

Market development

becomes more competitive.
One way of analysing the various strategies that an organisation
may use to grow the business is with Igor Ansoff’s (1965) matrix.
This considers the opportunities of offering existing and new
products within existing and/or new markets and the levels of risk
associated with each.

In 1957 Jack Taylor was a 35 year-old sales manager interested
in the unheard-of practice of leasing cars. This was then a new
and affordable alternative to running a car. Jack Taylor’s
background in the US Navy made him realise the importance of
taking care of those around you. His motto was, ‘Take care of
your customers and employees, and the profits will follow’.
Customer service and good employee relations therefore became

Increasing risk

Existing markets
New markets

Existing products

New products

Market penetration Product development
Market development

Diversification

Increasing risk

Product
Market

the cornerstone of the business. It was this that helped the
business to grow.
From 1957 – 1993 Enterprise concentrated on expanding its
operations across the USA. In this time it opened over 1,000
rental branches. Throughout the 90s Enterprise developed into
markets in Canada, the UK, Germany and Ireland.

www.thetimes100.co.uk

25

ENTERPRISE-RENT-A-CAR STUDY

29/8/12

10:25

Page 4

world are committed to reducing global warming through more ecofriendly technologies, while consumers are looking for different mobility
solutions. Enterprise therefore created WeCar, a membership carsharing programme which offers customers a car at an affordable
hourly rate. It typically uses fuel-efficient vehicles or hybrids to help
address concerns about the environment. Car sharing or hourly car
rental can also help to reduce the number of cars on the road. In this
way, WeCar members help to contribute to a cleaner environment.
Having the ability to respond quickly to the external environment
with new products and services is a benefit of being a privatelyowned business. Enterprise allows employees to make decisions
at a local level and has created an entrepreneurial spirit within the
organisation. This means that strategies are constantly reviewed to
ensure that Enterprise remains the market leader. New avenues of
In the car rental business, as all organisations are providing a

business are explored and researched. Underlying all of these

similar product, a key factor that differentiates one organisation

changes are Enterprise’s founding values. These are Enterprise’s

from another is the quality of the service that is provided for

driving forces behind growth and include values such as:

customers. Enterprise’s dramatic growth strategy has been made

• ‘Our brand is the most valuable thing we own.

possible through its high level of customer service. By listening to

• Great things happen when we listen...to our customers and to

its customers, it is able to provide greater satisfaction, with
employees being a vital part of that process.

each other.
• Customer service is our way of life.’

To provide superior customer service, Enterprise locates its
branches as close as possible to its customers. The convenience
of this service gives Enterprise a competitive advantage over its
rivals. However, in response to customer needs, Enterprise
opened its first on-airport location in 1995. The demand for this
service was so great that by 2005 Enterprise had over 200
on-airport branches. This meant that Enterprise kept ahead of its
competitors and increased its market share.

Product development
Product development strategies have helped Enterprise to develop
services in a market where it was already an established and
profitable business. This was considered to be a medium risk
strategy. Examples of Enterprise’s product development include its
unique ‘Pick-up’ service. This helped to lead the market in this
product offering. Enterprise’s Flex-E-Rent service (a long term
vehicle rental solution designed to meet the growing needs of
today’s businesses) and its Business Rental Programme (offering
customers a bespoke programme with special pricing) are
examples of product developments. These have widened its
service range to improve the customer experience and
strengthened its brand identity.
Factors in the external environment affect decisions about product
development. These are things taking place outside the business that
influence decisions within the organisation. Governments around the
26

www.thetimes100.co.uk

ENTERPRISE-RENT-A-CAR STUDY

29/8/12

10:25

Page 5

www.enterprise.co.uk

As a result, Enterprise’s activities are polycentric. This means that

and expensive, many customers swapped large cars for

some services are only offered in certain markets. For example,

smaller and more economical vehicles. This led to a collapse of

Rent-A-Car is operated in all markets globally. WeCar is operated

sales in the used car market. Enterprise relied on that market to

in the UK and the USA and Flex-E-Rent is only available in the UK.

sell on its vehicles. The future of the business was not certain
and so Enterprise diversified to buy Keefe. It was hoped that

Diversification

acquiring small, underdeveloped businesses would generate
more opportunities for Enterprise.

Diversification strategies involve widening an organisation’s scope

c) In 1977 Enterprise invested in Mexican Inn Chili Products.

across different products and market sectors. It is associated with

However, the company had little experience of both the

higher risks as it requires an organisation to take on new

packaged goods industry and the packaged food business.

experience and knowledge outside its existing markets and

Poor sales and a guaranteed buy-back arrangement with

products. The organisation may come across issues that it has

retailers (where unsold goods could be returned) meant that the

never faced before. It may need additional investment or skills.

business did not make a profit. Therefore the company sold the
business but learned a lot from the experience.
This last example illustrates the risk that diversification poses. Just
because a business is successful, like Enterprise, it can never
guarantee success in every venture it undertakes. However, the
experience with Mexican Inn did not put Enterprise off later
acquisitions that were outside the car rental business, for example,
TRG Group which is a leading manufacturer of luggage,
backpacks and travel accessories.

Conclusion
A marketing strategy is something that constantly evolves,
adapting to changing market conditions. Within Enterprise, the
outcomes from its many different types of business are constantly
reviewed and evaluated. Judgements are then fed into the
decision-making process. This enables new strategies to be
On the other hand, however, it provides the opportunity to explore

developed to improve operations.

new avenues of business. This can spread the risk allowing the
organisation to move into new and potentially profitable areas

However, while strategies change, one aspect of the business has

of operation.

remained in place. This is a continued focus on high levels of
customer service and employee relations. This strategy has

Enterprise’s values help to define what the organisation stands for.

enabled Enterprise to enjoy continued growth for more than

They also identify its capability and competences. Its core values

55 years and the prospect of further growth in the future.

of ‘brand, honesty, service, fun, hard work, listening, inclusion and
community’ are transferable. This means that the skills from the
main business can be applied to other business opportunities

1. What is a marketing strategy? (2 marks)

through diversification, potentially reducing the risks associated

2. Explain how the diversification strategy within the
Ansoff matrix differs from the other three strategies.

strategies include:

(4 marks)
3. Show with examples how research into product

a) Car Sales was established by Enterprise in 1962. This business
involves selling used cars to both the public and businesses. It
is now one of the largest sellers of used cars in the USA.
b) In 1974 Enterprise purchased Keefe Coffee Company, which
later developed as the Centric Group. The 1973 energy crisis

development at a local level helps organisations to
respond to the needs of its local environment.
(6 marks)

Exam-style questions

with this strategy. Examples of Enterprise’s diversification

4. Evaluate why some diversification decisions might be
higher risk than others. (8 marks)

had created uncertainty for Enterprise. As fuel became scarce

Enterprise Rent-A-Car | Marketing and product strategies for growth

27

HARRODS V3 AW

2/10/12

14:07

Page 2

PEOPLE

Developing a career path in retail

Introduction

Training is about gaining the skills needed for a job. These may
be learned at the place of work (on-the-job) or away from work

‘Harrods of London’ is a British institution. It is probably the most

(off-the-job). On-the-job training tends to be more cost-effective

well-known and respected retail store in the world. For 162 years,

and relevant. However, off-the-job training is usually carried out by

Harrods has built its unique reputation supported by its key brand

professional trainers. It also occurs away from the distractions of

values – British; Luxury; Innovation; Sensation; Service. Harrods

work. Training tends to have very specific and measurable goals,

employs approximately 5,000 people from 86 different nationalities

such as operating an IT system or till, understanding a process, or

who deal with up to 100,000 customers a day at peak times.

performing certain procedures (for example, cashing up).

Harrods needs employees who can face the challenges that its

Development is more about the individual – making him or her

reputation and standards bring. It needs people who are looking

more efficient at a job or capable of facing different responsibilities

for an exciting and rewarding long-term career with responsibility

and challenges. Development concentrates on the broader skills

and prospects. Its challenge is to find (and retain) employees with

that are applicable to a wider variety of situations, such as thinking

the right mix of skills and abilities, who can be developed to

creatively, decision-making and managing people. In short, training

become the managers of the future.

is typically linked to a particular subject matter and is applicable to
that subject only, while development is based on growing broader

To achieve this, Harrods has to counter some of the negative

skills which can be used in many situations.

perceptions about working in retail. Working in a shop has
traditionally been seen as low-skilled – with long hours, poor pay
and little chance of promotion. However, because quality is key at
Harrods, employees are well-paid, respected and have clear
career paths open to them. Senior managers at Harrods have
come from all walks of life and started out with various levels of
qualifications. All have benefited from development opportunities
provided by the company.

The importance of training
and development
Training and development is vital to any business. Its purpose at
Harrods is to better the performance of employees to enable

Harrods employees come from diverse backgrounds and different
nationalities. They have differing levels of competency, education
and experience. Harrods offers comprehensive Learning and
Development opportunities. These opportunities are offered at a
variety of levels to suit the needs of all Harrods employees. These
range from workshops for Sales Associates and Warehouse
Operatives to developmental programmes for senior managers.
Amber is a Harrods Retail Manager who started as a Sales
Associate at Harrods through an online application. Harrods has
created a web site www.harrodscareers.com to enable
candidates to apply for roles easily.

Harrods to meet its business goals. For example, at Harrods the
Sales Academy develops employees’ sales skills, leading to

‘I wasn’t sure I would get the job but it seemed a really

increased sales when they return to the shop floor. Allowing

challenging role and I was keen to try. I had only a little

employees to acquire new skills, expertise and qualifications

background in retail and none at all in the luxury retail market.

supports employee progression which leads to increased

Mostly I had been working in the hospitality sector.’

motivation. This supports Harrods’ retention strategies.
28

Curriculum topics covered: • Training • Development • Retention • Roles and responsibilities

Amber

HARRODS V3 AW

2/10/12

14:07

Page 3

However, Harrods Learning and Development ensured Amber
acquired the skills she needed to carry out her role. Development at
Harrods is linked to the company’s Business Competencies which
fall under four headings: Working at Harrods, Your Impact on
Others, Making Things Happen, Focus on Improvements.
Each Business Competency is supported by workshops so that
every skill can be improved. Learning is offered off-the-job in
‘bite-size’ sessions. These sessions give employees the chance to
learn more effectively over a much shorter period, reducing time
away from work and bringing a tightly focused approach to skills
development. They have been described as concise and punchy
and a workshop typically lasts 90 minutes. All the Business
Competencies are supported by self-help guides which are run either
on-or off-the-job and include activities such as observation and
review, reading, and ‘one minute guides’ offering top tips and tactics.

The sales and service programmes include the ‘Harrods Welcome’.
This induction provides essential training for new employees, such
as Harrods’ brand values and The Theatre of Selling. Other courses
ensure the effectiveness of Harrods sales associates:
• ‘Your Theatre’ is a two-day programme to improve sales skills
and provide the highest level of customer service. It introduces
the idea of selling as a ‘theatre’ requiring specific skills and
expertise. ‘The Theatre of Selling’ element covers personal
presentation, effective questioning, product selection and
closing the sale. ‘The Science of Selling’ develops employee
awareness of customer types and needs.
• The Harrods Fashion Programme is run in partnership with the
London College of Fashion. It enables sales associates to
understand the entire ‘product journey’ from design to sale.
• The School of Communication offers voice, body language and
presentation skills workshops.
For suitable candidates, the Harrods Sales Degree provides the
high level sales skills the company needs. This is the first and only
degree of its kind in Sales. It is recognised globally and can be
completed in two years.

Identifying key competencies also helps Harrods to design its
recruitment process to ensure that it attracts the best candidates.

High Potential programmes are concerned with succession

They must have the right approach to sales, customer service and

planning. They are aimed at ensuring there is a strong pipeline of

decision-making and support the ‘theatre of retail’ that underpins

potential senior managers. The Harrods Management Programme

Harrods’ reputation. This is about flair, showmanship and

develops ambitious and career-focused employees into a

expertise. Harrods Learning and Development department must

management role. Jessica joined the company after graduating with

be proactive in responding to changing customer needs. For

a degree in Art History. After just three years she is now a Harrods

example, Harrods has introduced cultural awareness training for

Retail Manager. She runs the Designer Collection sales floor,

employees better to serve the increasing number of customers

managing 26 employees and controlling a substantial budget.

from the Middle East, China, Brazil and Russia.

Developing a career path

‘My quick progression to Retail Manager was helped by

Harrods stands out from its competitors by providing a wide variety

own development to a large extent. Harrods supports you

of development opportunities for all employees. This means the

if you are keen to get on. The Harrods Management

business can recruit and retain good managers and maintain

Programme gave me eight months of training, both in-

improvements in sales and business performance. Individuals’

house and external. This, together with the support of my

self-esteem and motivation is raised. Once a year, managers talk to

mentor, has equipped me with the specific skills I need to

employees about their progress and ambitions during appraisals.

carry out my job effectively.’

the fact that Harrods allows people to take control of their

Jessica

Employees then identify their personal development targets.
www.thetimes100.co.uk

29

HARRODS V3 AW

29/8/12

10:26

Page 4

Harrods offers other programmes:

Harrods also has systems to improve employee communications

• The Business Academy which supports managers as they

so that it can listen to feedback and address any issues. There is

progress into more senior positions.
• The Oxford Summer School which is a challenging academic

an Internal Communications department, regular performance
assessment meetings and SMART targets for employees to reach.

learning opportunity held at Keble College, Oxford. This is

These initiatives have seen employee turnover fall from 51.4% in

designed to highlight some of the problems, decisions and

2006 to 25% in November 2011.

challenges of running a retail business. 10 prized places are
awarded to high potential managers.
• The Buying Academy which develops Assistant Buyers into
Buyers of the future.

Careers at Harrods
Harrods ensures there is a clear career path for any employee,
from any background. Three key levels in Harrods are the sales
employee, department managers and senior managers. At each
level, employees can benefit from Harrods development
programmes in order to build a career.
James is a Sales Associate and one of Harrods first Sales Degree
students. When an injury prevented him from following his
previously chosen career in contemporary dance, he applied to
Harrods. He has never looked back. Harrods training has given
him transferable skills. He has been able to work within more than
one department, providing the same high levels of customer
experience.

‘The course is absolutely fantastic. I feel very privileged to
be on it. It is very much focused on work-based learning.
It provides real insight into consumer psychology and
behaviour - why people do what they do and how they

Retaining talent

shop - and how to deal with challenging situations. My
managers are very supportive. If I need to take some time

Employee retention is important for businesses. A low employee

out during the day to make notes on an interesting

turnover can keep recruitment costs down. It also ensures a skilled

situation, then I can. It has offered some amazing

and experienced workforce. Employee development is beneficial for

opportunities, such as giving me behind-the-scenes

both the employee and the business. However, sometimes

information on how Harrods works and increasing my

employees think that their new-found skills will enable them to gain

awareness of its global influence. I have realised that

a better job elsewhere. Harrods, therefore, has put in place

Harrods offers great benefits, good conditions and an

strategies to keep its talented Retail Managers. It has found that

opportunity to work amongst fantastic people.’

James

employees who develop within the company tend to stay. Those
brought in from outside are more likely to leave. Another vital part of
retention for Harrods involves identifying the ‘DNA’ (key factors) of

James will complete his BA Honours in 2012. He believes that the

great sales people. It then matches applicants to these factors.

qualification will provide the additional skills he needs before he
steps up to the next level at Harrods. James now expects his

To reduce employee turnover Harrods has developed a better

future to be with Harrods.

management structure, improved benefits and created initiatives
which make Harrods a ‘great place to work’. Harrods has put in

Amber’s application was successful because of the customer skills

place a system of rewards and incentives:

she was able to bring from previous experiences. She is now the

• An excellent package of employee benefits including good pay,

Retail Manager of Childrenswear. Her responsibilities range from

employee discounts and a good working environment.

overseeing budgets to managing both stock and people, as well

• Commission and sales bonuses for individuals and teams.

as upholding the Harrods standards of service. By taking

• Improved work schedules which help to give a better

advantage of the Harrods Management Programme, Amber has

work-life balance.
30

risen to a better paid and more responsible job.
www.thetimes100.co.uk

HARRODS V3 AW

29/8/12

10:26

Page 5

www.harrods.com

Conclusion
People may have negative ideas about retail work based on their
own experiences of part-time or vacation work. Harrods is
different as it is possible to start building a career from any level.
Harrods is about the ‘theatre’ of retail. As with a theatre
production, however, excellence is built on hard work and basic
skills. The flair must be underpinned with discipline and attending
to day-to-day issues, such as unpacking and displaying stock and
managing employees.
Providing development opportunities is a key factor in how
Harrods maintains its high levels of employee retention. The
business looks after its employees and helps them along their
career path. As a result employees are loyal to the company and
continue to offer exceptional levels of commitment and service.

‘Retail is a challenging environment but I find it exciting.
Although the company aims to hire the right people for the
job in the first place, there is a whole range of training
available to ensure we are equipped with key skills, for
example, brand training for all the different ranges we offer.
Harrods promotes the view that all employees should
manage themselves responsibly and take advantage of
Amber
opportunities offered.’

Sabrina joined Harrods 10 years ago as a part-time Sales
Associate whilst studying for her degree. After graduating she
worked in Human Resources (HR) and, with Harrods support,
gained further qualifications. This led to a series of promotions and
experience in other roles including Business Manager. Her current
role is Head of Personal Shopping, managing a team of 50
people. Personal shopping is about creativity and exceptional
service. Her role requires strong organisational skills, commercial
understanding and practical and strategic thinking. Sabrina’s
experiences at Harrods shows how diverse a career in the retail
environment can be.
1. Describe the difference between training and
and supported me in my career development has made
me eternally loyal to the company. Before coming to
Harrods I hadn’t really considered a career in retail, now I
can’t imagine working anywhere else. The thing I enjoy
most about working at Harrods is that every day is unique
and the work is interesting and innovative.’

Harrods | Developing a career path in retail

Sabrina

development. (2 marks)
2. Explain the importance of developing employees.
(4 marks)
3. Analyse the methods by which Harrods ensures it
recruits and retains its employees. (6 marks)
4. Evaluate how training and development leads to career

Exam-style questions

‘Knowing that my senior managers recognised my ability

progression at Harrods. (8 marks)

31

IET STUDY

29/8/12

10:27

Page 2

S T R AT E G Y

Entrepreneurship in engineering

Introduction

More recently engineers have embraced new technologies and
materials to create alternative energy sources, such as wave

In an increasingly service-orientated world of work, it is easy to

power (from the sea) and credit card sized computers that plug

miss the vital role engineers play in transforming our lives.

straight into your TV (Raspberry Pi). They have designed high

Engineering is the crucible in which scientific, mathematic and

tech, energy-efficient buildings such as the new Olympic Park for

design skills come together. The Engineering industry makes up

the London 2012 Games. It was a British engineer and

nearly one-fifth of the UK economy and employs over 4.5 million
people. The UK is still the world’s seventh biggest manufacturer.
Engineering is a key part of a range of industries including music,
TV and film, construction, transport, cosmetics, medicine, food
and fashion.

entrepreneur, Tim-Berners Lee, who first developed the internet.
For more information and insight into the impacts of engineering
on our lives visit www.ietfaraday.org
To be at the leading edge of engineering development, it is

Britain has been a leader in engineering for over 300 years.
British engineers transformed modern transport by designing and
building some of the first railway engines (Thomas Stevenson), ships

important for engineers to share their ideas. This is where the
Institution of Engineering and Technology (IET) plays a vital role.
The IET is a world leading professional organisation with the vision

(Isambard Kingdom Brunel), aeroplanes (Geoffrey de Havilland)

to share and advance knowledge, promoting science, engineering

and motor cars (Rolls-Royce). They also developed new road

and technology across the world. Through professional

building techniques, bridges and viaducts.

development, partnerships and networking the IET offers a
professional home for life. It is a trusted source of essential
engineering intelligence to over 150,000 members across
127 countries. Anyone with an interest in engineering can join the
IET (www.theiet.org) to network with people with similar interests.
The IET has developed close partnerships with businesses and is
licensed to award a range of engineering qualifications such as
CEng, IEng, Eng Tech and ICT Tech. Businesses have a massive
demand for more engineers and technicians. The IET is heavily
involved with running activities for students and developing
resources for science, maths and technology teachers to enable
students to see the relevance of their learning to the engineering
sector.
Engineering skills are particularly effective when combined with
enterprise. This case study examines the relationship between
engineering and enterprise and the role that the IET has played in
developing engineer entrepreneurs.

32

Curriculum topics covered: • Entrepreneurs • Characteristics of an entrepreneur
• Starting up a business • Engineering and enterprise

IET STUDY

2/10/12

14:08

Page 3

Why people become entrepreneurs

Nature of reward Description

An entrepreneur is someone who is prepared to sacrifice their own

Personal
satisfaction

The opportunity to do something different.
To choose your own career path.

Financial

The opportunity to reap a profit from your
hard work and enterprise.

Independence

The opportunity to make your own decisions.
As an owner you can set your own targets
and standards.

Self-fulfilment

Being able to use your own skills and abilities.
What you enjoy becomes your career.

time, effort and money to turn a good idea into a marketable
product. For example, Charles Rolls and Frederick Royce were
motor engineers. They showed enterprise by setting up the
Rolls-Royce car manufacturing company. James Dyson is an
example of a modern engineer entrepreneur. He invented the ball
wheelbarrow and the Dyson Dual Cyclone Vacuum cleaner. His
Dual Cyclone idea involves filtering dust in a funnel of air that spins
at up to one thousand miles per hour with 100% efficiency.
Dyson’s enterprise has created a global brand, employing workers
in many countries and selling across the world.

Characteristics of an entrepreneur
There is no such thing as a typical entrepreneur. Some
Entrepreneur - risk taker,
setting up and running
his own business

James
Dyson

Engineer - applies
new technologies to
develop new advanced
products

entrepreneurs are quiet and hard-working, while others are more
outgoing and flamboyant. The key to being a successful
entrepreneur lies in the ability to take an idea and then, through
the process of innovation, develop it in such a way that it
becomes a marketable product or service. Research indicates that
there are a number of characteristics that are quite likely to be

Entrepreneurism is not for everyone because it requires hard work,

present in high-achieving entrepreneurs:

long hours and the ability to keep going in difficult times. It is not

• The ability to learn from others – entrepreneurs tend to be

sufficient just to have a good idea. The entrepreneur needs to

good at networking. They benefit from being members of

conduct market research to find out if it is a product that consumers

organisations like the IET where they can learn best practice

will be willing to buy at a price that yields an acceptable profit.

ideas from others.
• Self confidence – a belief in their own abilities and ideas.

When Dyson built the Dual Cyclone it took thousands of hours of
experimentation with over 5,000 prototypes (trial models) to iron
out weaknesses. The process of testing and market research cost
money. Entrepreneurs are not guaranteed a pay-off at the end of
their hard work - more new enterprises fail than succeed.
However, the rewards for successful enterprise are considerable.

• Being innovative/inventive – being able to generate ideas, either
for new products/services or new ways of applying them.
• Self motivation and determination – the drive to keep going and
see things through.
• Showing initiative – it is necessary to have not only the ideas
for the business, but also the detailed plans to achieve
objectives (both thinking and doing).

www.thetimes100.co.uk

33

IET STUDY

29/8/12

10:27

Page 4

• Analytical abilities – capable of researching and evaluating each

Step 2: Market research in order to find out information such as

aspect of the business, from development, through finance,

whether potential customers like the product or service, how they

production, to marketing and sales.

would use it, how often they would use it and how much they

• The ability to make decisions and to take (considered) risks.

would be willing to pay. For example, in creating the hybrid car, the

• A focus on results that ensures products are sold for a profit.

developers needed to check that customers would be prepared to
pay for the extra engineering that went into the new designs.

The combination of many of these skills and qualities, with the
right support, ensures ideas do not just remain as dreams but

Step 3: Identifying the target audience and the characteristics of

become real, viable businesses.

the typical customer for the new product. This allows the business
to create the right sort of advertising and promotion to reach

Starting up a business

them. For example, competitive long distance runners make up a
distinct segment of customers for SatNav directed watches as

There are a number of legal requirements that must be met to

they show distance travelled.

form a business. A new business will adopt one of a number of
possible structures. Many very small start-up businesses are in the

Step 4: Identifying suitable sources of finance. These may come

form of a sole trader (one owner) or partnership (two or more

from personal funds, bank loans or special grants from trust funds

owners). These forms of business give the owner/s more freedom

for new enterprises such as the Prince’s Trust and Shell Livewire.

to make decisions themselves and to keep the profits their hard
work has earned.

Finally, all start-up businesses need a well worked business plan.
The plan should set out the objectives of the business, sales

A business can also take the form of a limited company. A limited

targets, marketing details, the main costs and the resources

company is owned by shareholders who share the profits the

needed, including equipment, accommodation and people. The

business makes. The company is run by directors. However,

plan can be used to demonstrate to a potential lender or investor

limited companies tend to be more expensive to run and

that the business idea is well thought out and likely to generate a

administer than sole traders or partnerships. They need to be

return on investment.

registered with the Registrar of Companies and have to produce
complicated paperwork.

A young entrepreneur’s story

Starting up a business involves a number of steps:

Matt Wilson is an engineer, an entrepreneur and regards himself

Step 1: Generating good business ideas. These might be, for

as a pioneer in cloud-based communications. His tale is one of

example, based on the skills of the owners, or by spotting a gap

rags to riches. At sixteen years old he had no job and £100 in his

in the market or extending an existing idea.

pocket. Today at 34, he is a chartered engineer, an IET Fellow and
Chief Executive of his own highly successful business: Crosby
Communications PLC. Matt started a disco agency at the age of
twelve. He funded it by washing cars in his neighbourhood. It was
a real success and at fifteen he was interviewed on local BBC
radio as a ‘budding entrepreneur that would go places’.

34

www.thetimes100.co.uk

IET STUDY

2/10/12

14:08

Page 5

www.theiet.org

He had a keen interest in electronics and the entrepreneur in him

IET to make young people aware of the careers available to them

enjoyed hunting out and fixing old TVs and radios which he sold

in the engineering sector. They also help to get students

through his local newspaper.

participating in activities that will get them excited about technology
and give them some of the practical experience valued by

After finishing school Matt became unemployed. His dad convinced

universities and employers, for example, FIRST LEGO League,

him to use his interest in electronics to take an apprenticeship in

F1 and 4x4 In Schools, Greenpower and Young Engineers Clubs.

electrical engineering. At the same time Matt set up the small
company that was to become Crosby Communications PLC.
‘From no money, no prospects and unemployed, I
transformed my life with Crosby Communications PLC. I
‘I started the business whilst doing an apprenticeship, doing

am proud because I’ve taken it from being a company

odd jobs such as fitting telephone systems into offices. During

worth £1 when I started, to now being worth millions in

the day I went to college to learn theory. This was coupled

terms of company valuation. This pride comes from

with placements in companies where I learned how to install

putting the time in and seeing that all the stress and hassle

electrical systems. I didn’t start trading officially until I was 18,

was worth it in the end. I am the first to be doing telecoms

building the business up on a part-time basis.’

in the cloud – which uses my joint skills of engineering and

Matt

the commercial experience/application.’

Matt

The toughest challenge Matt faced was getting the finance he
needed to get the business off the ground. He continued with his

Conclusion

DJ work to save money to fund the new company. Once he had
raised the cash he needed, Matt was able to concentrate on the

Engineers have been at the heart of the British economy and

voice, data and video business of Crosby Communication. He

industry for a long time. Matt Wilson is part of a long line of British

continued to grow the business, branching into other areas to

engineers going back to Brunel and more recently James Dyson.

spread the risks. Once established, Matt turned his attention
towards self-development, seeking to get himself and the

There are many different types of engineers ranging from
mechanical and electrical engineers to software designers,

company recognised for the technical abilities that he and it
possessed. To gain this recognition he joined the IET and in the
summer of 2010 Matt achieved IET Fellow status.

bio-technology engineers and those working with nano-technology
(on a minute scale). These engineers form communities through
professional organisations such as the IET in order to share good
ideas. The IET also gives professional accreditation and status to
the work of engineers. Engineers like Brunel, Dyson and Matt

‘I joined IET in 2007 because I wanted to be part of an
important institution that is not solely academic. The IET is
made up of engineers, real people with hands-on experience
in engineering. Becoming a Fellow helped me to further my
career and become involved in committees whose policies
affect the engineering industry. This commands a lot of
respect. My customers also recognise the quality of my work
because I have achieved Fellow status.’

Wilson are not just ideas people - they are entrepreneurs, having
set up their own companies to put their ideas into the market. This
involved taking risks but the rewards are high. These rewards are
not just financial, but perhaps more importantly, are concerned with
the freedom to take pride in one’s own work and shape the future.
For more information on the IET please visit www.theiet.org.

Matt
1. What are the benefits that people like James Dyson
and Matt Wilson have gained from becoming

committees and mentoring a number of new engineers in his area.
He is an IET Science, Technology, Engineering and Maths (STEM)
Ambassador, going to schools to get children interested in STEM
subjects. There is a huge demand from business of all sizes,
across the UK and overseas, for people with good maths and

entrepreneurial engineers? (2 marks)
2. Describe the main characteristics of a successful
entrepreneur. (4 marks)
3. Using the case study, analyse the problems entrepreneurs
have to overcome to bring a product to market. (6 marks)
4. To what extent does success as an entrepreneur

science qualifications and the practical ability to apply those skills

depend solely upon the characteristics and qualities of

as professional engineers and technicians. Many of the IET’s

that person? (8 marks)

Exam-style questions

Matt is now an active member of the IET, working on local

members are involved with programmes led or supported by the

IET | Entrepreneurship in engineering

35

IMI STUDY

29/8/12

10:28

Page 2

S T R AT E G Y

Engineering Advantage – strategy in action

• Fluid Power – develops precision-engineered valves to control

Introduction

air or fluid flow in many industries. Examples of applications
Achieving competitive advantage is not easy, particularly in global

include ventilators and anaesthesia machines; compressed air

markets. Businesses that do well in these markets need to be able

systems for train door control; and valve solutions for

to use their systems, technologies and knowledge effectively
across the whole of the organisation and respond to local people,
cultures and different ways of working.

controlling emissions on heavy duty trucks.
• Severe Service – develops specialised valves to control the flow
of steam, gas or fluids in heavy industries such as nuclear, oil
and gas, and petrochemicals. These industries require the

One such organisation that uses its knowledge and expertise to
achieve competitive advantage is IMI. IMI is a global engineering
group involving many different engineering specialities. It is

highest levels of safety, operating in conditions of extreme
pressure and temperature.
• Indoor Climate – produces valve solutions for heating and

recognised worldwide for its innovation, expertise and global

cooling systems to reduce energy consumption, for example,

service and sells engineering solutions in over 50 countries to

thermostatic valves for radiators or energy efficient heating

match customer needs.

systems for office blocks such as the Shard in London.
• Beverage Dispense – provides cooling and dispensing

IMI’s competitive advantage comes from combining the
knowledge and skills of its people with an in-depth understanding
of what its customers want and need. IMI’s strengths of expertise
and innovation differentiate it in the markets it serves.

equipment for drinks such as carbonated soft drinks and
smoothies for retailers, restaurants and hotels.
• Merchandising – develops innovative displays for shops to
influence consumer buying decisions.

IMI operates in a B2B (business to business) environment, providing

This case study looks at how IMI has developed its strategy

tailored products and services to companies. These include large

of ‘Engineering Advantage’, combining its skills and

household names such as Chevron, Shell, Volvo Trucks, General

knowledge, customer insight and innovation to achieve global

Motors, Coca-Cola and McDonalds, as well as smaller niche

market leadership.

companies dealing in specialised equipment or building materials.

Setting strategy
The company has a long history of working in valve and fluid
engineering technology. It uses this expertise to design and

Strategies are the long-term plans that a business puts in place to

develop products to control the flow of liquids or gases for

achieve its aims and objectives. IMI’s goal is to achieve market

organisations in a wide range of markets. These include nuclear,

leadership in the global niche markets it serves. A niche market is

oil and gas, medical devices and the food and drink industry. By

a relatively small and often highly specialised segment of a market,

providing specialised products and services, IMI adds value for

which has few competing companies supplying it.

customers and helps them, for example, to reduce carbon
emissions or improve energy efficiency.

There are many different strategies an organisation can choose
to achieve its goals. For example, these might include developing

The business spans five areas or ‘platforms’, most of which rely on

new products, growing by acquiring other companies or

IMI’s core skills and competencies in valve and fluid engineering:

reducing costs.

36

Curriculum topics covered: • Strategy • Values
• SLEPT analysis • Innovation

IMI STUDY

29/8/12

10:28

Page 3

IMI’s strategy focuses on:
• increasing business in its chosen niche markets
• accelerating growth by investing in new products and
emerging markets
• maintaining high operating margins and reducing costs of
manufacturing and costs within its supply chain.
Few competitors can provide the specialist knowledge and
tailored fluid engineering solutions IMI offers, so it is able to
command higher margins for its high quality products and services
in its chosen niche markets. IMI’s strategy brings together three
key aspects:
• its engineering skills in fluid technology and innovation
• its market leading positions in its chosen niche markets
• its exposure to markets which are benefitting from long
term structural growth trends such as climate change
and urbanisation.
IMI calls the point of overlap between these three factors, the
‘sweetspot’. Where these three areas come together is known as
strategic convergence. It is an area where IMI expects to achieve
clear market leadership, higher profit margins, greater product
differentiation, opportunities to meet global trends and to grow.
Over half of IMI’s operations are positioned within the strategic
‘sweetspot’ today, with plans to increase this to over 70% over
the next five years.

do things competitor products cannot. This enables IMI to attract
higher profit margins as well as gaining clear market leadership
and creating barriers to entry for other competitors. This strategy
IMI defines as ‘Engineering Advantage’.
By understanding the needs of its markets and customers, IMI is
able to provide them with customised products and services. This
creates customer loyalty and enhances competitive advantage.
IMI’s technical focus is on the precise and reliable control of gases
and fluids. However, to retain its leadership position IMI needs its
people to develop business competencies such as:
• Key Account Management (KAM) – which requires highly
talented and customer-focused people to maintain the
company’s in-depth insight into what its markets need.
• Project management – translating the insight offered through KAM
into products and services which deliver real commercial advantage
for its customers. That advantage could be unique selling features
to increase market share or lower supply chain costs.
• Seizing the initiative in emerging economies – IMI invests in
emerging economies – areas of the world that are rapidly
growing and industrialising such as China, India, Brazil and
Eastern Europe. These offer great potential for growth, so IMI
needs people with strong commercial skills and local market
knowledge to win new business.

Strategic convergence

IMI’s people are a key factor in helping to deliver its strategy and
their skills are a core competence for the business. Engineering

Strategic convergence provides IMI with a clear focus. At the

and technical know-how is important. However, IMI looks for

‘sweetspot’ IMI’s knowledge and skills are delivering products and

people who also have an entrepreneurial spirit. This mindset helps

services which meet long term customer needs and help to give

the company to look for new and creative ways to add value for

greater product differentiation. This means offering products which

customers and the business.

www.thetimes100.co.uk

37

IMI STUDY

29/8/12

10:28

Page 4

IMI also supports ongoing development of its people in various

2. Resource scarcity

ways in order to maintain its innovative edge. For example, the IMI

There is a global need to manage resources such as water and

Key Account Management Academy not only provides training for

energy more efficiently in order to ensure sustainability. IMI is

employees but also establishes best practice across the Group.

developing a range of engineering solutions to manage the use of

This also helps the company to transfer knowledge from one part

energy, water and waste more efficiently. IMI’s innovative engineering

of the business to another.

has also developed ways of controlling building environments.

External drivers for growth
Businesses need to take account of and react to what is
happening outside the company – the external environment.
These environmental factors may be analysed through the
acronym SLEPT. These stand for:
• Social factors – for example, the UK’s ageing population is
affecting the availability of skills
• Legal factors – regulatory standards or legislation such as
Health & Safety might lead to increased training needs

In France IMI has developed the country’s first ‘energy
positive’ building which produces more energy than it
consumes. IMI’s technical skills in valve and fluid control
have produced a new pressurisation and heating control
system. This allows the building owner to control the
temperature of each room depending upon heating
requirements. This not only gives better comfort to users,
but the building has been designed to reduce energy
consumption by 65% compared to buildings constructed
under current standards of regulation.

• Economic factors – the current global recession is causing
downturn in demand
• Political factors – government initiatives are requiring
businesses to address the issues of climate change
• Technological factors – the impact of the internet makes it
easier to compare the value of products and services.

3. Urbanisation
The rapid urbanisation taking place around the world, particularly in
emerging markets such as China, requires significant investment in
mass transit infrastructure. This is to ensure that the rapidly
expanding urban populations have reliable transport options to

These external factors may influence how a business will achieve

enable them to travel easily around the cities and, of course, to work.

its strategies. By monitoring the external environment it is possible
to identify whether factors represent either an opportunity or a

CSR Zhuzhou in China services main line electric locomotive

threat to achieving its strategies.

trains. They required a new type of pantograph (the
equipment which links the train to the overhead electricity

IMI has identified four clear global trends within its external

cables) as their existing pantograph could only cope with

environment. These trends are shaping the direction that the

speeds of up to 200km per hour. IMI’s subsidiary, Norgren,

business is taking to achieve growth.

was able to create a new pantograph which could operate
effectively at 400km per hour in addition to coping with

1. Climate change

temperature fluctuations from - 40°C to +80°C – without

IMI has responded to this global issue by developing products to

affecting performance. The new technology and design not

provide cleaner energy as well as helping organisations to reduce

only met the high standards of the Chinese Ministry of Rail,

their energy consumption.

but also effectively utilised both standard and bespoke
Norgren technology to set it apart from the competition.

IMI is supplying severe service valves into a number of
major liquefied natural gas projects (LNG) in Australasia.
The demand for LNG has been growing because gas is a
much cleaner fuel to use for power generation than coal.
IMI has a market-leading position in applications such as
anti-surge valves. These valves have to be able to provide
very precise control at very low temperatures down to
minus 162°C.

38

www.thetimes100.co.uk

IMI STUDY

29/8/12

10:28

Page 5

www.imiplc.com

4. Ageing population

The IMI Way is an integrated approach across the company and

IMI’s technical expertise is also used to support many different

enables the business to achieve sustainability in its management of:

types of medical equipment. As the global population is living

• Health and safety – IMI promotes a strong health and safety

longer, more support is needed to keep people healthy. IMI is

culture. This minimises risks to people as well as to
communities and the environment.

delivering specialised products to support this.

• Energy efficiency – IMI has an internal commitment to become
more energy efficient in developing its products and processes.
Shenzhen Mindray Electronic Co Ltd is a developer of

• Risk in the supply chain – IMI sources materials and

medical devices for patient monitoring in China. The

components from many countries. To make sure that products

company needed a regulator to control the flow of inlet

are sourced responsibly, it sets out standards for its suppliers

gas for a life support ventilator. This had to meet very strict

as part of its Supply Chain policy. This includes aspects such

size dimensions and performance specifications. IMI’s new

as minimum working conditions.

regulator is 15% lighter and 20% smaller than those
previously available, which makes the device more

• Supporting customers to act responsibly in business – IMI helps its
customers to recognise and develop opportunities for sustainability.

portable and convenient. The new regulator is also 60%
quicker to assemble and is 10% cheaper than previous
models. This has enabled Mindray to supply more

Kroger Co. is one of the largest US grocery retailers.

ventilators across China and the world and meet the

Sustainability is one of its core values. In 2010 it introduced a

increasing need for life support systems.

new retail service area in which frozen beverages could be
served. To support this service they wanted a sustainable
frozen dispenser, with high performance and reliability. IMI’s

Internal values

expertise produced a final product which reduced energy
consumption and wear on components. In addition, the LED

IMI believes in behaving responsibly towards all its stakeholders,

lighting used in the product provided seven times the life

including its customers, shareholders and employees. Its values of

expectancy of traditional bulbs. The effect was to reduce

Excellence, Innovation and Integrity guide the behaviours of all

carbon footprint, eliminate waste and create energy savings

employees. Values are the beliefs shared by those within an

of more than 25% over traditional equipment.

organisation which underpin its business strategies.
IMI’s values translate through its processes to increase the value

Conclusion

of its products and services to customers. They also define the
high standards for how the business and its employees deal with
customers and stakeholders. This commitment to the business
behaving in a responsible manner is known as the IMI Way.

Using a powerful combination of knowledge, skills and market insight
enables IMI not only to develop innovative solutions for its customers,
but also to create a competitive advantage.
IMI’s strategy of Engineering Advantage enables IMI to support its
customers in niche markets across the globe in a responsible way. It

Excellence

Integrity

Innovation

brings together the company’s values, expertise and knowledge in
order to meet the challenges of the global drivers it has identified. Its
strategy brings together its people and processes to maximise the
capabilities of the business, provide more value for customers and
make the organisation distinctive.

• Providing value
to customers
• Understanding
and meeting
customers’ needs

• Demanding the
highest ethical
standards from
ourselves, our
partners and our
suppliers
• Not compromising
on health and
safety

1. Describe what is meant by a niche market. (2 marks)
2. Explain the purpose of developing a business strategy.
(4 marks)
3. Analyse how managing knowledge and skills
contributes to IMI’s competitive advantage. (6 marks)
4. Evaluate other ways in which IMI might differentiate the
business within global markets. (8 marks)

IMI | Engineering Advantage – strategy in action

Exam-style questions

• Delivering results
• Reliable products
delivered on-time

39

JD SPORTS STUDY

29/8/12

10:28

Page 2

MARKETING

Using market research to support decision making

The group has also secured brands such as The Duffer of

Introduction

St George, Sergio Tacchini (under UK licence) and the fashion
Organisations that operate in the business-to-consumer (B2C)

brands Chilli Pepper, Nanny State and Sonneti. The JD Sports

market are increasingly turning to market research to support their

Fashion Group now has over 900 stores across the UK and

decision making processes. A retail business, for example, might

Europe and a reputation for stocking exclusive and stylish ranges.

be considering opening new stores, expanding internationally,
proposing to diversify its product range or thinking about acquiring
another company. Before proceeding, the business will require
specific information to understand the implications of making such
changes. The process of collecting this information and
developing this understanding is known as market research.
This case study focuses on how JD (part of JD Sports Fashion
PLC), the UK’s leading retailer of fashionable sports and leisure
wear, uses market research to support and develop its business.
As a B2C retailer, JD’s performance depends on providing the
most desirable brands and products at the right price and in the

What is market research?
The exchange between sellers (supply) and buyers (demand) for
particular goods or services is called a market. A market does not
necessarily exist in a single location, nor need it be a real location –
products can be bought and sold online.
Markets change constantly and businesses need to have a clear
understanding of both the supply and demand. The principal role
of market research, therefore, is to provide a business with a
comprehensive view of consumers in order to develop products
and services that satisfy their needs better than the competition.

right locations to meet with the demands of the consumer.
Also, given the increased complexity of the business environment,
Founded in 1981 in Mossley, near Manchester, JD today is a

it is no longer enough to make key decisions using a ‘gut-feel’

nationally recognised UK high street fascia. For 20 years, the

approach alone. Decisions need to be informed and market

business expanded through organic growth, meaning that growth

research helps to support this process, significantly reducing the

was generated by building sales revenue through increasing its

level of financial risk attached with investment decisions.

network of stores.
JD has expanded more rapidly in recent years through
acquisitions (inorganic growth), significantly increasing its JD store
base through the purchase of First Sport (2002) and All:sports
(2005). Through the purchase of Scotts (2004), Bank (2007) and,
most recently, Blacks (2012), it has diversified the business into
the young branded fashion and outdoor markets.
The Group has also made international acquisitions including
Chausport (France), Champion Sports (Ireland) and Sprinter
(Spain) as it has expanded its business overseas.
40

Curriculum topics covered: • What is market research? • Primary market research
• Secondary market research • Quantitative and qualitative market research

JD SPORTS STUDY

29/8/12

10:28

Page 3

Market research involves the capture and analysis of consumer,

These are:

competitor and market trend data. This enables JD to assess

• market penetration – winning greater market share in its

more accurately the level of demand for its products. It also
influences decisions to target capital investment on projects that
will offer the best return on that investment, such as opening a

existing markets
• market development – entering new countries or new retail
sectors

new store or entering a new market.

• product development – acquiring or developing new products

Market research provides consumer feedback. It is essential for JD

• diversification – taking the business in a completely new

or brands
to have this dialogue with the consumer to gain insight into what

direction.

they think about its range of products, brands and services. This
enables the business to meet its demands and outperform the
Product

competition. It helps the business develop a clear and informed
strategic business plan which all business colleagues can work

Present

New

Market

towards fulfilling. For example, this information can create a winning
marketing mix to target promotions to reach different customer

Present

Market penetration

Product development

New

Market development

Diversification

groups or influence decisions on range planning in new stores.

Market research
informs the
marketing mix

Primary market research
Product decisions
Focused on
consumer
expectations

Prices
Create value
for customers

Place
Stores in locations
convenient for
customers

Promotion
Reach customers
through targeted
messages

There are principally two types of market research – primary and
secondary. Primary research is sometimes known as field
research. This is because it involves gathering data through new

Research can also provide information about the size and

research. This data can be collected in either a quantitative or

performance of markets. It can inform a business about who the

qualitative format.

key competitors are, what they are doing, and their market share.
Potential areas of opportunity within an international, national and

Quantitative research is numerically-based and obtains the hard

local context can also be identified. By using tools such as an

numbers from which decisions can be made with confidence.

Ansoff’s matrix to assess the levels of risk, JD can then decide

Examples of quantitative market research at JD include:

which marketing strategies to focus on.

• Exit surveys – carried out face-to-face with consumers as they
leave the store. This is a simple survey covering a cross-section
of stores to gather the views of consumers in different locations
and regions. At JD the purpose of the survey is primarily to
understand the reasons for visit, frequency of visit/purchase and
reasons for and against purchase.
• The ‘shopping bag’ survey – the JD research team monitors
what carrier bags customers entering JD stores are carrying.
This helps identify what other stores JD customers use and are
spending money in. It provides competitor insight and an idea of
which retailers attract a similar customer profile to JD, a variable
that can influence the location of new JD store openings.
• On-site fieldwork – JD’s dedicated Site Research team invests
significant time researching new locations. This involves
defining the extent of a location’s catchment area, reviewing the
presence and quality of the competition and assessing the
pitch and visibility (i.e. how busy the area is) of a unit. This
helps build a detailed SWOT analysis of each new site.

www.thetimes100.co.uk

41

JD SPORTS STUDY

2/10/12

14:09

Page 4

• Commercial market research reports – prepared by research
experts, these provide estimates of the size (volume of sales) in
each product or market category and market share by
operators within these sectors. At JD this information is
invaluable when assessing new product markets (e.g.
outdoors) or international opportunities (e.g. France and Spain).
However, there are drawbacks with any form of market research.
It costs money to collect and analyse large amounts of information
and the results are not always definitive. Numerical data might be
biased, particularly if the sample size is too small. Focus groups
may be skewed if one member of a focus group is too dominant
and stops others from voicing their opinions.
Qualitative information is a primary form of market research which

Market research at JD

focuses on consumer feelings and opinions on a product or
service. This type of research illuminates the facts and figures

The location of stores is a critical element of the success of a

collected through quantitative research. Examples of qualitative

retailer in any market. Sound competitive locations can provide a

research at JD include:

source of competitive advantage. To achieve this it is essential to

• Focus groups – by speaking at length with small groups of

build a clear understanding of the consumer and how they interact

8-10 people, more insightful questions can be asked regarding

with a retailer and its sales channels (i.e. stores, internet or kiosks).

brands and new product developments. At JD these are
typically run in schools and colleges, where it can get direct

So, how does JD build up information about its consumers and

feedback from its core consumers.

develop a clear location strategy? One method employed by the

• Depth interviews – this involves a researcher accompanying the

company is its check-out survey. This is a simple but highly

consumer on a shopping trip in store. This drills deeper into

effective survey that is carried out with customers at the till. By

shopper behaviour and their reactions to stores.

collecting the customer’s home postcode, gender and age and
matching this data to the products purchased, JD can build up

When undertaking market research, it is important to reflect the

detailed consumer profiles.

views of all consumers within the business’ target market.
However, this would be a huge exercise. One way of managing
this is to use sampling methods. Sampling involves taking the
responses of a representative group of consumers that are likely to
reflect the opinions of the customer base.

Secondary market research
Secondary research is sometimes known as ‘desk research’. This
research draws on material that has been collected by another
organisation to provide market information. Secondary research
data provides a fact-based overview of the market. Examples of
secondary research include:
• Government census data – the census is conducted every
10 years across the UK and brings together data on factors
such as the number of people, their ages and occupations in
a location.
• Geo-demographic data – collected by specialist agencies, this
segmentation tool profiles consumers based on their lifestage
(e.g. marital status, number of children) and their lifestyle (e.g.
newspapers read, leisure activities, TV programmes watched).
42

www.thetimes100.co.uk

JD SPORTS STUDY

29/8/12

10:28

Page 5

www.jdsports.co.uk

JD also asks purchasers a further question: has the item been

It is important that research is properly managed to ensure that the

purchased for yourself or for another person? This helps JD to

data collected is valid and reliable. It is also useful, where practical, to

understand the difference between customers (the purchaser) and

use a variety of methods to validate research findings. At JD the

its consumers (the end user). For example, some purchases are

findings from the exit surveys (smaller sample sizes) are validated by

made by parents buying clothes or shoes for their children. This

the check-out survey (larger sample size).

additional question helps prevent the survey results from
being misinterpreted.
The survey is carried out annually over a two-week period and
involves over 350,000 customers. This provides a robust sample from

Put together, this information helps JD to anticipate the level of
demand customers may have for its products. Sales expectations
can be accurately forecast to ensure profitable stores are opened.

which to extract invaluable insights into consumer buying behaviour.
In-depth analysis of the survey results helps the company:

JD has also embraced the internet as a means to support business

• understand how far customers travel to stores – this enables

strategies. The data collected through the online ordering process is

JD to define real catchment areas for each store and

‘live’ information and it provides a valuable insight into consumer

understand the overlap with other existing stores

demand. It can influence store ranges and support decisions about

• build consumer profiles by gender, age, brand and lifestyle

its stores network by highlighting ‘hotspots’ with high levels of

• identify and quantify new store location opportunities

demand but no physical presence. In an increasingly multi-channel

• influence product ranges to meet the buying habits of

world, capturing, analysing and acting on this information offers a

customers in different locations
• assist with marketing strategies to target the consumer

business a key competitive advantage. Again, this information can
provide useful insight into potential international opportunities.

more effectively.

Conclusion
This type of information is collected regularly by large retailers such
as supermarkets through the data collected on their store loyalty

In recent years, the UK retail industry has faced challenging

cards. However, loyalty card schemes can be very expensive to run.

conditions. However, against this tough economic backdrop,

Till surveys, although only providing a snapshot of the consumer,

JD has managed to maintain growth through a thorough

offer a cost effective means of gathering data. JD is relatively unique

understanding of market opportunities. Market research is not a

on the high street in using this type of survey to capture additional

one-off process. Markets change and a business like JD needs to

customer information. More recently this survey has been replicated

evaluate customer trends and monitor competitors on a regular

across JD stores in France and Spain.

basis in order to remain competitive.
JD has therefore established research mechanisms to provide
ongoing feedback. These provide a mix of qualitative and
quantitative market data obtained directly from consumers and
from published research. By understanding its consumer base,
JD has established itself as the market leading retailer of
fashionable sports and leisure wear.

1. Describe the difference between primary and

purpose of market research. (4 marks)
3. Analyse why market research should be viewed as an
ongoing process. (6 marks)
4. Evaluate how market research, if undertaken properly,
adds value to the decisions made by a large company.

Exam-style questions

secondary market research. (2 marks)
2. Use an example from the case study to explain the

Why does it help to reduce risk? (8 marks)

JD Sports | Using market research to support decision making

43

kellogg's

29/8/12

10:29

Page 2

PEOPLE

Devising a communication plan

Introduction

Kellogg’s has been active in supporting breakfast clubs in schools
for many years, working with the education charity ContinYou, the

Research shows that children benefit from eating a healthy

experts on breakfast clubs. Breakfast clubs provide a healthy meal

breakfast prior to the start of the school day. However, too often

at the start of the day in a safe and friendly environment. They also

children have no breakfast at all or eat chocolate or crisps and a

provide a great opportunity for kids to play, learn and socialise

fizzy drink on their way to school.

with classmates.

This case study examines how Kellogg’s devised a plan to

Since 1998, this partnership has set up 500 breakfast clubs in

communicate the importance of breakfast to selected target

schools across the UK. Interested schools have been supported

audiences through a multi-platform campaign. This was in support

with training on how to start a club and have received a start-up

of its ‘Help give a child a breakfast’ campaign launched in

grant from Kellogg’s.

October 2011.
According to research by Kellogg’s, many schools have run into
Kellogg’s is the world’s leading producer of cereals. Its products

trouble with the funding of their breakfast club due to recent

are manufactured in 18 countries and sold in more than 180

budget cuts by the UK government. Kellogg’s responded by

countries. Kellogg’s produces some of the world’s most easily

putting a team together to create a communications plan which

recognisable brands such as Kellogg’s Corn Flakes, Coco Pops

highlighted the importance of breakfast clubs to parents, schools,

and Rice Krispies. For more than 100 years, Kellogg’s has been a

the UK government and the public.

leader in health and nutrition through providing consumers with a
wide variety of food products.

Writing a communication plan
The communication process involves transmitting information from
a sender to a receiver. However, effective communication needs to
ensure that the message has been not only received but also
clearly understood. This is relevant whether the communication is
internal or external.

Sender

Encoding

Message/
Media

Decoding

Receiver

The communication process
Feedback

Response

The message needs to be sent in a way that will appeal to and be
understood easily by the target receiver or audience. This involves
selecting an appropriate format or channel to deliver the message.
44

Curriculum topics covered: • The communications process
• A communication plan • Communication channels • Barriers to communication

kellogg's

29/8/12

10:29

Page 3

Examples of media that may be used include a leaflet, a television

Research with teachers showed that the majority believe that the

advert and a personal letter. The feedback part of the process is

lack of breakfast opportunities would lead to poorer academic

vital as this is how the sender knows if the message has been

results and worsening behaviour in schools.

received correctly.
The purpose of the Kellogg’s campaign was to show its
For the message to be effective, barriers to communication
(known as ‘noise’) need to be eliminated or reduced. Noise is
anything that might distort the message or prevent the receiver
getting or understanding the message. For example, noise might
include using language or jargon that the receiver will not
understand or using a channel such as email or the internet when
the receiver does not have a computer.

commitment to breakfast clubs in schools in the UK. The
important messages that the campaign was aiming to get
across were that:
• breakfast is important for people of all ages especially
young people
• breakfast clubs positively impact on children’s behaviour,
attendance and ability to concentrate in morning lessons
• Kellogg’s has supported breakfast clubs since 1998

A communications plan uses the same principles of tailoring
the message and the delivery channel for a target audience.

• by buying Kellogg’s Corn Flakes you are helping to feed
children at breakfast clubs.

A communications plan also sets out the overall objectives to be

Kellogg’s faced potential noise for its messages from different

achieved and the means by which these will be measured.

sources. At the time, the government spending review was high
profile in the press which could have resulted in the Kellogg’s story
being overlooked. In addition, other food companies also support

Research

breakfast clubs which could have led to confusion or dilution
Overall objectives

of its messages.

Message
Audience

It also needed to make clear that this was not a marketing effort
Specific targets

to promote Kellogg’s brands but a part of the company’s longstanding Corporate Responsibility programme. Corporate

Channels and formats
Findings
Evaluation

Responsibility involves understanding the impact the business has
on the wider community and working to make that impact
positive. Kellogg’s has been supporting breakfast clubs in schools
and local communities for 14 years and has invested over
£1.5 million to date.

Businesses engage in both internal and external communication.

Fitting the message to the audience

Internal communication may involve transmitting messages to
shareholders, senior managers, other employees or contractors.

The Kellogg’s breakfast club campaign had a number of key

Communication externally may be to a range of stakeholders

objectives which depended on promoting the right messages to

including customers, suppliers, the media, government or the

different audiences. Key aspects of the campaign were not only to

wider public. In each case, the nature of the message and the

get messages across about the benefits of breakfast and

format used may be tailored to suit the audience. An effective

breakfast clubs, but also to raise funds for the clubs through the

internal communications plan can help to give clear direction

sale of Kellogg’s products and to make schools aware of the

within the organisation and improve employee motivation.

available funding from Kellogg’s to support their breakfast clubs.

Externally, it can even change public opinion.
In order to achieve these objectives, Kellogg’s devised a

Background and purpose

communication plan for internal and external stakeholders.

Research commissioned by Kellogg’s showed that as many as

employees. They were encouraged to get involved through

1 in 7 children in the UK do not eat breakfast and that up to 25%

information posted on the company intranet (internal

eat crisps, chocolate or fast food on the way to school. In addition,

communication). Employees were also invited to attend a

1 in every 8 (around 3,000) breakfast clubs in the UK have closed

breakfast club in the atrium of the Kellogg’s building with two local

due to government budget cuts and up to 45% of remaining clubs

primary schools and then visit breakfast clubs that received

were at risk of closure.

funding from Kellogg’s.

www.thetimes100.co.uk

The main internal stakeholders being targeted were Kellogg’s

45

kellogg's

29/8/12

10:29

Page 4

Objective

Target audience

Develop greater understanding of the impact of Kellogg’s long-term

Shareholders, employees, customers, national media, wider public,

support of breakfast clubs as part of its Corporate Responsibility

government, others

programme
Change or increase public awareness of the impact of breakfast

Shareholders, employees, consumers, national media, wider public,

club closures

government, others

Raise additional funding for breakfast clubs by attracting

Consumers

consumers to support the initiative through donations made from
the purchase of Kellogg’s Corn Flakes
Improve public perception of the company

Consumers, the wider public and key opinion formers

Motivate employees by involving them in the initiative

Employees

However, the campaign was primarily designed for the needs of

Using the right medium

external audiences. These included:
• Schools – to alert them to the Kellogg’s grants available,
inviting them to apply for funding.
• The media – to generate excitement and press interest

In order to convey any message effectively to a targeted audience,
the most suitable medium and channel needs to be used. For
example, if a company wants to promote products with a mass

about the campaign and to increase public awareness of the

market appeal to a wide audience, it might use well-scripted

issues involved.

television advertising. To advertise a job opportunity for a finance

• Parents – to demonstrate Kellogg’s socially responsible
stance and inform them how breakfast clubs could support
their children.
• Members of Parliament (MPs) – asking them to encourage

director of a company, a business might place an advertisement
in the Financial Times (or other financial and business-related
publications).
Take, for example, the message that ‘Kellogg’s supports breakfast

schools in their constituencies (i.e. the area that they had been

clubs’. How should Kellogg’s communicate this message to

voted to represent) to apply for funding.

children and parents? Kellogg’s approach was to use a multi-

• The public – to attract consumers to buy Kellogg’s products

platform campaign. This is an approach which communicates over

in order to generate additional funding for the breakfast

a range of media, rather than using just one, in order to reach

club initiative.

many different audiences.
The various campaign communications involved a mixture of
formal and informal communications. Formal communications are
through approved channels and so might include, for example,
a company policy document or a press release. Kellogg’s formal
communications included the letters sent to MPs.
In contrast, informal communication is more spontaneous and less
structured, for example, a chat with colleagues over coffee.
Informal communication can be very effective in a business as it
has the advantage of being quicker and more direct. Kellogg’s
face-to-face interactions at breakfast clubs and the briefing to
mummy bloggers demonstrated a more informal approach to
communication. The problem with informal communication is that
it could result in rumours that can cause messages to be
mistrusted or even convey inaccurate information.

46

www.thetimes100.co.uk

kellogg's

2/10/12

14:10

Page 5

www.kelloggs.co.uk

Campaign activities

Format/channel of communication
Written communications

• Letters were sent to MPs and to schools
• Press releases were sent to television, radio and newspapers (as well as appearing on the
Kellogg’s website)
• Information about the campaign was added to eight million boxes of Kellogg’s Corn Flakes
• Information for employees was communicated through internal briefings and posters displayed in
the company’s social areas e.g. reception and restaurant

Television and radio advertising

• Various visual (television) and audio (radio) advertisements were placed
• The launch of the campaign featured on ITV’s Daybreak programme

Internet and social media

• A dedicated website featured the campaign and included videos of a local breakfast club
• A twibbon (a method of raising awareness through Twitter) was created so that people could
show their support for the campaign on their twitter and facebook accounts
• A media partnership was created with Netmums (a social networking site for parents offering
advice, information of interest and a blog)
• Messages were communicated through the company intranet
• Kellogg’s employees also received voicemail messages encouraging them to support the campaign

Face-to-face

• Kellogg’s held a briefing day about the campaign with mummy bloggers
• MPs were invited to attend their local breakfast clubs to award funding cheques
• Kellogg’s employees volunteered at their local breakfast club and joined a breakfast club held at a
Kellogg’s on-site launch

Conclusion

These results clearly indicate that Kellogg’s has communicated
its messages effectively. The time taken in planning the

Breakfast clubs provide a healthy meal at the start of the day in a

communications through a multi-platform approach worked in

safe and friendly environment. They also provide a great

relation to each of the targeted audiences. As a food company

opportunity for kids to play, learn and socialise with classmates.

that takes its responsibility for nutrition seriously, Kellogg’s has
maintained its commitment to write to and talk to key government

Kellogg’s has long supported breakfast clubs and so planned a
multi-platform approach to communicate key messages about the
importance of breakfast and breakfast clubs to various audiences.
The feedback to any communication is important to evaluate

officials to get the message over about the importance of
breakfast for children. This highlights how effective communication
is not just a one-off event but an ongoing cycle requiring
evaluation and a response to feedback received.

whether messages are reaching the target audience effectively.
Kellogg’s therefore carried out an evaluation of its campaign.
Highlights include:
• The first six weeks of the campaign generated 73 press articles

process? (2 marks)
2. Explain two benefits of Kellogg’s using its multi-

Daybreak and news articles in The Observer and The

platform campaign to communicate its messages.

Independent. All carried positive reaction to the messages and

(4 marks)

reached a potential audience of nine million people.
• Over 700 schools applied for funding and around 500 of these
received a grant of up to £450 for their breakfast club.
• Kellogg’s employees have attended 15 of those breakfast clubs
with the local MP to see what difference the funding has made
to the children.
• The money raised from the campaign will provide a million

3. Choose two audiences of Kellogg’s campaign shown
in the case study and identify which media you think
would be particularly effective for getting the messages
across to them, explaining why. (6 marks)

Exam-style questions

across a variety of media – including news coverage on ITV’s

1. What are the key steps in the communication

4. How far do you think the Kellogg’s campaign will go in
changing the press and public opinion about breakfast
clubs? Justify your opinions. (8 marks)

breakfasts by the end of 2012.
Kellogg’s | Devising a communication plan

47

LA FARGE STUDY

2/10/12

14:11

Page 2

S T R AT E G Y

Developing a sustainable supply chain to add value

Introduction
Health & Safety

Lafarge values

Lafarge may not be a company name that you would quickly
recognise but its products and expertise have helped to create
some of the UK’s biggest infrastructure projects, including the
M25 motorway, the Channel Tunnel, Canary Wharf in London and
Sustainability

several UK power stations.

Innovation

The Lafarge Group is the world’s largest supplier of building
materials and has a global reputation for developing creative and
innovative products, services and solutions. The company
produces essential products – cement, aggregates and concrete –

Global expertise
and local
knowledge

Customer
service

which are integral to society. Cement and concrete are basic
materials in all walks of life – everyone relies on the country’s
infrastructure such as roads, hospitals, power stations, housing
Managing health and safety for employees, contractors, the wider

and railways.

public and the environment throughout these processes is vital.
The Group employs over 68,000 people in 64 countries and

Lafarge believes that ‘No task is so important that anyone should

Lafarge’s four Business Units in the UK (Cement, Aggregates,

get hurt doing it’ (Dyfrig James, President Lafarge UK). It has a

Readymix concrete, and Asphalt) have nearly 3,000 employees

stated goal of ‘Zero Harm’ – that is, zero accidents, incidents or

working across more than 200 sites around the country. As

job-related illness. This objective applies to employees, its supply

market leader, it holds around 40% of the UK cement market.

chain and the public.

Lafarge’s business is based on its core values. These, along with
highly skilled and experienced people, provide the platform for

Together, the drive for increased sustainability, coupled with a

operating safely and responsibly.

continuous focus on health and safety, is generating a need for
high quality recruits at both graduate and apprentice levels. They

Lafarge is facing many interesting challenges. As a major extractor

will provide the creative solutions that the business and the

of raw materials in the primary sector, issues of sustainability and

industry need to meet these challenges. Such recruits are needed,

corporate social responsibility are of high importance. The drive for

not just in science or engineering, but also in manufacturing and

increased sustainability affects every part of Lafarge’s activities –

commercial parts of the business.

from extraction and manufacture, to transport and delivery, to
waste reduction and restoration. In recognition of its high record of

This case study will explore how Lafarge UK is active in all three

achievement, Lafarge has won several major industry awards in

sectors of industry and how it manages the need to develop the

the UK, including one from the Environment Agency for its work

business alongside protecting the environment and respecting

on recycling water.

local communities.

48

Curriculum topics covered: • Sectors of industry • Supply chain
• Sustainability • Efficiency

LA FARGE STUDY

29/8/12

10:29

Page 3

The interdependence between the sectors is known as the ‘chain

Sectors of industry and
sustainable supply chains

of production’. This identifies the interlinked stages that a product
goes through from raw materials to arriving at the final customer.

Business activities may be classified by the type of production that

Each stage adds value to the previous one. A sustainable supply

takes place. All activities fall into one of the following three sectors

chain aims to ensure that the business is conducted in a manner

of industry:

which can be maintained in the future and which does not impact

• Primary – involving the extraction of raw materials or the

adversely on future generations. The key challenge is to deliver

growing of crops

products and services that give value to the business and the

• Secondary – involving a transformation of raw materials into

customer, whilst maintaining a positive environmental impact.

finished goods
• Tertiary – covering the provision of services.

Lafarge operates in all three sectors of its industry, extracting raw
materials, manufacturing finished goods and providing sales and
after-sales service for customers. In this way, Lafarge is able to

Examples of job roles
across Lafarge’s sectors
of activity

take control of and manage not just operational efficiencies but
also quality, health and safety and its impact on the environment.

• Surveyor
• Geologist
• Quarry manager

Primary

• Chemist
• Scientist
• Production manager

Secondary

Planning/
Extraction

R&D/
Manufacturing

Transportation

Sales and
after-sales
service

• Technical support
• Sales
• Customer service

Tertiary

Since the C19th, the balance of UK activity overall has been

Primary sector

changing, moving to an increasingly service-orientated economy.
Industries such as mining (primary) and manufacturing (secondary)

Cement is a product that originally dates back to the Egyptians

have reduced due to cheaper goods from overseas competitors.

and Romans. However, since its ‘rediscovery’ in the C19th, it has

In 2011, the primary sector accounted for 1.4% of UK GDP, the

been evolving in response to new technology and innovation

secondary sector for around 22% of GDP, with the tertiary sector

resulting in the complex product of today. In a typical year, the UK

dominating with just over 76% of GDP. However, certain key

mineral products industry contributes to the building of 160,000

industries in the UK, such as steel and cement, have experienced

new homes, improvements to water services and the maintenance

growth, with new technologies and innovation driving demand.

of the UK road and rail networks.

Lafarge therefore needs more people with both specialist and
There are around 1,300 quarries and manufacturing sites in the

generalist skills to meet that growth.

UK producing £5bn worth of products each year. Over 80% of the
raw materials used in its processes come from Lafarge’s own

Sectors of industry and the supply chain
Raw
materials

Manufacturing

Primary
Sector

Secondary
Sector

Tertiary
Sector

Extracts or
develops
natural
resources such
as timber,
agriculture,
oil or
minerals.

Makes use of
primary
extracted
materials
to build,
manufacture
or develop
finished
products.

Provides the services
needed to meet the needs
of the end users, for
example through
retailing, distribution,
insurance and other
cutomer services.

Retailer

Distribution

Consumer

operations and are therefore under its direct control. This
integrated supply chain ensures Lafarge can manage quality,
quantity and guaranteed delivery though its own activities.
In its primary sector activities, Lafarge’s extraction processes
involve drilling or controlled explosions to blast limestone, granite,
shale or clay from quarries. This provides the raw ingredients
required to make cement, aggregates and concrete. The rock is
transported to a crusher to produce the different sizes of rock
needed to suit different products for customers.

www.thetimes100.co.uk

49

LA FARGE STUDY

29/8/12

10:29

Page 4

Lafarge is committed to sourcing its materials and managing
extraction in the most responsible and sustainable way possible.
Rock quarries are usually operated for many decades and then
restored. Sand and gravel quarries are shallower than rock
quarries and can be worked in stages. This means the land is
used and restored in phases. As the majority of raw materials to
make cement comes from new quarries, Lafarge is also
investigating how it can reduce dependence on these sources. It
is looking at ways of treating waste and by-products from other
industries to replace natural materials. This is an important aspect
of its sustainable practices.
In addition, it works with external bodies such as the Environment
Agency in the planning stages of assessing a new quarry site. This

It creates value for the client due to less time being needed for

means Lafarge can take into account key issues affecting the

application and lower costs of equipment. This also contributes to

environment from the outset. At the end of the quarry’s life,

a healthier environment for construction workers.

Lafarge is committed to the restoration of land. For example, it
uses recovered inert waste from its extraction and waste

The manufacturing process to create cement involves heating the

management processes as part of the restoration process.

raw materials to a very high temperature, grinding the clinker finely
and adding different minerals to the resulting cement to give

It then works in partnership with other organisations (such as the

different properties. Important properties customers look for

Staffordshire Wildlife Trust) to re-use the land for the good of the

include increased resistance to weather or a higher quality finish.

community and to provide a lasting legacy. For example, the

Lafarge is the leader in the development of low carbon cement

National Memorial in Staffordshire is on a former quarry site.

products and has five main manufacturing locations, producing

Lafarge has also been involved in managing 34 SSSIs (Sites of

five million tonnes of cement each year.

Special Scientific Interest), as well as creating award-winning
parks, lakes and education centres. Over 700 SSSIs have been

By its nature, cement manufacturing consumes large amounts of

developed in the UK from former sites of mineral operations.

non-renewable resources and also generates CO2. Lafarge is
therefore committed to reviewing its processes to reduce its impact

Secondary sector

on the environment. Its production plants are certified under British
Standards for both quality and environmental management. One

A business will aim to add value (both financial and non-financial)

way in which Lafarge helps to minimise its impact and emissions is

as a product moves from inputs to outputs across the three

by having on-site concrete production plants for large-scale

sectors of industry.

projects. This is more efficient and enables Lafarge to provide
continuous supply throughout the life of the project.

Input +

manufacturing
process

=

output with
added value

As a major user of significant amounts of water in its processes,
Lafarge is also piloting ‘water footprint’ assessments. These aim
to use water more efficiently and reduce consumption where

Globally Lafarge invests over 170 million Euros every year into

possible. Other examples of Lafarge’s ‘best practice’ include:

research and development. This makes it one of the world’s leading

• using the fly-ash waste product from iron and steel smelting to

research and development companies. This investment helps to
provide ongoing innovation in its secondary sector production
processes which benefits customers. Its skilled chemists and

make low-carbon cement
• using alternatives to fossil fuels (such as chipped used tyres) in
the kiln heating process

scientists work in laboratories across the UK. For example, it

• investing in more efficient manufacturing units

created a self-compacting concrete called Agilia®. This saves

• offering a cement recycling service to customers for unused,

customers' time and money in the construction process.
50

outdated bags of products.
www.thetimes100.co.uk

LA FARGE STUDY

29/8/12

10:29

Page 5

www.lafarge.co.uk

Lafarge also takes innovation right through the supply chain into
its packaging. Its weather-resistant plastic packaging is easier to
handle and is tear-resistant. Both effects benefit customers.
Plastic packaging for cement, perhaps surprisingly, is more
sustainable than paper as less material is lost through damaged
bags, which is better for the environment.

Tertiary sector
At the later stages of the supply chain, Lafarge’s activities in the
tertiary (or service) sector range from transporting finished goods
to providing a specialist advice and after-sales service for
customers. This ensures they get the best use of the products.

By adopting the principles of re-using waste products from other
industries, Lafarge can respond to environmental challenges in a
sustainable way:

Lafarge supplies its products in large volumes to intermediaries,
such as local authorities or building companies, where the
products are used on major projects. An example is Terminal 5 at
Heathrow Airport.

• Its energy recovery service recycles used tyres for fuel.
• Landfill sites have processes for separating out waste in order
to recover re-usable materials.

Conclusion

Lafarge uses different means of transport – road, rail and water – to

To generate the cement and concrete that the building industry

help it reduce carbon emissions wherever possible. Lafarge has a

needs, it is necessary to extract raw materials from the earth. In

fleet of road vehicles for transporting bulk cement. It has modernised

order to minimise the impact its activities have on the environment

the fleet to increase the loads each tanker can carry in order to

and create a sustainable business, Lafarge has put in place

reduce the number of vehicles on the road and reduce emissions. Of

principles and best practices across its integrated supply chain.

its nationwide network of 14 depots, 11 have direct rail access. More
than one million tonnes of cement a year is moved by rail, more than

By focusing on re-use, recycling and reducing emissions in every

any other company. This removes hundreds of thousands of vehicles

stage, from initial planning of a quarry, to final restoration of the

off the roads each year, reducing congestion, pollution and CO2

land, Lafarge is maintaining a sound business whilst respecting

emissions. Lafarge is also an expert in transporting by water.

the environment and supporting local communities.

One important area of added value for customers is through

Lafarge continues to be heavily involved in restoration projects

Lafarge’s Construction Solutions and Contracting services. Its

such as the newly completed Chalk Grassland project in Kent

technical sales people, along with IT, purchasing and customer

which has restored 40 hectares of grassland for sheep grazing. It

service teams, provide ongoing support and advice for customers:

is also in partnership with the RSPB on a prospective project at

• Lafarge Contracting specialises in providing asphalt-based

the Dunbar Works in Scotland, where the quarry site is being

solutions for surfacing projects. These might be as wide-

transformed into a nature reserve.

ranging as car parks, race tracks, bus lanes, housing
developments and airport runways.
• Construction Solutions uses all Lafarge’s expertise, from
provides all the expertise and materials to take a project from
initial design, through production, to finished installation in one
combined service.
Lafarge continues to demonstrate its innovation and sustainability
in the tertiary sector. As part of its sustainability plans, Lafarge

example of each from the case study. (2 marks)
2. Describe two ways in which Lafarge is acting
sustainably. (4 marks)
3. Analyse how Lafarge uses its supply chain to help add
value. (6 marks)
4. Evaluate the extent to which Lafarge’s investment in
researching and developing sustainable practices benefits

Exam-style questions

aggregates to cement, to offer a ‘one-stop-shop’ service. This

1. State the three main sectors of industry and give one

the business, its customers and society. (8 marks)

goes beyond simply managing or restoring its extraction sites.

Lafarge UK | Developing a sustainable supply chain to add value

51

LOGICA

29/8/12

10:30

Page 2

ENVIRONMENT

Using skills to respond to the external environment

For example, Logica has provided:

Introduction

• the automated ticketing system for London Underground
Businesses do not operate in isolation. They are constantly faced
with internal and external factors that impact on the dynamics of
their operations. Monitoring the external environment is vital to
identify changes that could affect the business operations. Being
able to address and adapt to these changes ensures the longer
term survival of the business.

• the outsourcing of IT and technical applications for Taylor
Wimpey, the UK house building business
• business applications for the Ministry of Justice’s Courts,
Tribunals and offices
• the design of electronic security services for the UK’s
Department of Defence
• the system for generating Premium Bonds (ERNIE).

Logica is an innovative IT services organisation that brings people,
business and technologies together. Logica employs more than

Logica therefore requires highly skilled employees who are able to

41,000 people and has clients around the world in a variety of

adapt and deal with a range of challenges. The work of Logica is not

industries including automotive, oil and gas and manufacturing.

just about developing technology. It is about getting business benefits

Logica’s services aim to add value for clients through, for example,

from the technology available. It is also about enabling clients to

improving efficiency and productivity or reducing waste.

reduce environmental impacts. Logica’s experts increasingly provide
sustainable and long-term solutions for its customers. For example, it
works with governments and automotive companies to develop and
promote sustainable methods of transport.

Political
influences

This case study illustrates how Logica monitors its external
environment using PEST analysis. This is a structured business
tool that looks at the political, economic, social and technological

Technological
influences

Business

influences affecting a business. By auditing and monitoring these
influences, Logica can be proactive in ensuring it remains
competitive by adapting its own business and by generating
innovative and unique solutions for its clients.
For businesses to stay ahead of their competitors, they have to

Social
influences

deliver innovative products and services. Logica works with
customers to aid business development.
52

Curriculum topics covered: • Political factors • Economic factors
• Social factors • Technological factors

Economic
influences

LOGICA

29/8/12

10:30

Page 3

Also, in 2007 Logica launched a three-year sponsored degree
programme with the University of Winchester. The degree
programmes BA (Hons) Business Management and BA (Hons)
Business Management with IT attract applications from students
throughout the UK. These degrees allow students to combine
academic study with on-the-job learning. Students spend one day
a week studying on campus and four days a week working at
Logica. Logica pays the course fees as well as offering students
an attractive salary from day one. Upon graduation they can
further develop their professional career within Logica.
As part of its sustainable focus, Logica has also responded
quickly to government initiatives on climate change and reducing
emissions. For example, it has been involved in the government’s
new Cycle Hire Scheme in London. It secured the contract for the
major IT components with Serco, the contractor responsible for

Political factors

designing, building and operating the system. Logica’s role is
central and focuses on the design and build of the simple-to-use

Business decisions may be influenced by political factors. For

payment system. This is supported by a back office function.

example, recent public sector budget cuts by the UK government
and increased university fees are affecting the education sector.

Economic factors

For students this has meant making key decisions about how they
intend to pursue their careers. This in turn has meant that

Economic factors change rapidly and are sometimes difficult to

academic providers need to review how they will meet the

predict. The global economic recession has affected how most

challenges of generating income.

firms conduct business, perhaps by looking for cost-savings or
reducing waste. As businesses focus on areas where efficiencies

Logica identified that these changes in the educational landscape

can be made, some might choose to outsource functions to

could have an impact on the number of potential employees with

reduce costs, rather than employing people with specialist skills.

the skills and competencies that it requires. For example, it had to

This has created increased demand for outsourced services such

consider the affordability of higher education for students and how

as those Logica offers. Logica’s employees have the specialist IT

this could influence long-term development opportunities within

skills required to offer businesses of all types efficient and effective

the company. The increasing cost of becoming a student may

ways to manage systems and processes.

restrict the social mobility of talented individuals and they may
then need to consider alternative routes to gaining qualifications
and experience.
Logica has therefore reviewed its workforce planning. It has now
engaged in strategies to ensure it has enough workers with the
right skills both now and in the future. To address the changes in
the educational landscape, Logica has introduced apprenticeships
and enhanced its graduate scheme. Logica has embraced the
strategy of direct training as it provides the company with a new
pool of talent, with the focus on individuals who have decided to
specialise in IT or Computer Science. This is why Logica has
embarked on creating Level 3 Apprenticeships in 2012. This
widens the range of talented young people that Logica needs and
supports the organisation’s long-term commitment to career
development of its employees.

www.thetimes100.co.uk

53

LOGICA

29/8/12

10:30

Page 4

The make-up of society is also changing. The UK has an older
and more diverse society with people from many different
backgrounds and cultures. A diverse workforce brings together
people with different skills and competencies. Diversity is therefore
a focus of Logica’s HR strategy. Logica competes with many other
firms for a limited pool of highly talented individuals with good IT
and numerical skills. To increase this pool of talent, Logica aims to
increase the number of females in its workforce. Within the IT
industry, females only account for an average of 16% of the
graduates in Computer Science/IT.
Logica understands that increasing the number of females in its
workforce will bring different strengths. Logica has been heavily
Logica was selected by BAE Systems, the global defence and

involved in driving equality within the workplace. It has supported

security company, to provide a Human Resources outsourcing

the Women’s Empowerment Principles (WEPs). This is a

service for its employees within the UK. Logica works with BAE

partnership initiative of the United Nations. It has joined 267

to increase the effectiveness of its systems and to enhance the

nations across the world in order to improve gender equality. This

efficiency of its operations. This improves how BAE engages with

has helped to empower women within the workplace and the

its employees to maximise their potential. This also helps BAE

community. To do this they have created a Women’s Mentoring

to reduce its costs and focus on growth.

Programme aimed at supporting women in their career
development. This will ensure that more women rise through the

The recession in the UK has also heightened the need for the

ranks into positions of senior management.

government to cut spending. One example of this is the
government’s commitment to achieving savings through the better

Another way that Logica is addressing this issue is by supporting

use of its technologies. As a result Logica has been awarded a

IT clubs in local schools near Logica’s offices across the UK.

10-year outsourcing contract with the Serious Organised Crime

These clubs promote the importance of IT and demonstrate the

Agency. During this contract Logica will manage the Agency’s

variety of exciting career opportunities available within the industry,

information and communication technologies and related services.

particularly for young women.

This creates efficiencies by bringing together data centres and
networks, whilst helping the Agency to exploit intelligence and

By offering a range of different routes into the business and

case management more effectively through an integrated system.

making education more affordable, Logica is able to provide an
exciting and desirable option for career development.

Similarly, Logica’s services have helped Transport Scotland to put
together the largest ticketing scheme in the world. This has
involved the installation of new electronic ticket machines on 7,000
buses and 200 bus operator sites. The system processes over
12 million journeys every month and delivers cost-savings in terms
of employee time.

Social factors
Social factors reflect the constant change in society’s interests,
beliefs and actions. There are now different working patterns
available which allow men and women to balance work and life
commitments better. New technology is driving faster and more
integrated forms of communication - 25 years ago the mobile
phone was just an evolving concept; the personal computer and
internet were just starting to make an impact.
54

www.thetimes100.co.uk

LOGICA

29/8/12

10:30

Page 5

www.logica.co.uk

Logica’s technology supports its clients in many ways but to do
this it needs to be able to offer a dynamic and innovative working
environment for its highly skilled employees from diverse
backgrounds. Logica’s people are key to the technologies that it
provides, as employees need to have both the IT skills and an
innovative mindset. As an example, graduates within the business
may be involved in any part of the organisation, from business
consultancy, systems design and development and
implementation, to testing the support of new technologies,
training or applications management.

Conclusion
Technological factors

The external environment in which businesses operate changes
very quickly. Political, economic, social and technological changes

The speed of technological advances means that existing electronic

all put pressure on organisations. Logica is a global business that

equipment, IT processes and systems will quickly become dated. To

provides innovative solutions in data and systems management for

remain competitive a business must ensure that its processes and

its clients, helping their organisations to respond to external

systems support innovation and creativity for itself and its

factors. The nature of the work that Logica can offer an employee

customers. Logica has embraced recent advances in technology to

is both challenging and stimulating.

offer its clients the most advanced and sustainable services
possible. An example of this is the use of ‘cloud’ technology. Cloud

By monitoring and auditing its own external environment, Logica

technology allows companies to access and buy into data storage

has also been able to adapt its business to maximise efficiency

or software ‘on demand’ through the internet. It enables companies

and exploit opportunities. This has been done through adjusting

to access a shared infrastructure. This eliminates the need for firms

its service offering to utilise advancements in technology and drive

to buy software for every staff member or support a server to store

improvements to IT services for clients.

company data and pay for staff to maintain it. This in turn reduces
waste in terms of both time and money and can help a business to

In addition, Logica has been proactive in dealing with the political

become more competitive by unlocking capital. This capital can

and social influences that have affected the educational landscape.

then be invested in other areas.

It now offers a variety of entry routes into the business, such as
apprenticeships, sponsored degrees and graduate programmes.

Logica has also worked with the UK police force to develop the

The business has created long-term career development

Police National Database. This is the most secure national police

opportunities for young people. Logica is also actively addressing

system developed to date and only authorised and vetted users

the shortage of females within IT. 28% of its recent intake of

will have access to the system. It will make a big difference to

graduates were female. This is a significant improvement on the

policing in the UK as all police forces will now have easy access to

industry average of just 16%. Logica hopes to increase this further

key information from forces around the country. The system will

through its IT clubs in schools, which further promote the exciting

make a real difference in protecting people in society.

and varied career opportunities available within the industry.

Technology can also help businesses to meet the issues of
are keen to reduce waste and be more energy-efficient. Using
more efficient IT systems can help reduce waste, recycle more or
cut carbon emissions. For example Logica has created innovative
software for Ford which monitors vehicle emissions. If drivers
behave in an environmentally efficient way, they may benefit from
fuel discounts. Systems like this help businesses save money

1. Describe the four elements of a PEST analysis. (2 marks)
2. Give four examples of other external factors not featured
in the case study. (4 marks)
3. Analyse how social influences have changed the
attitudes and approaches of employers towards
employees. (6 marks)
4. Evaluate how the external environment influences the

Exam-style questions

sustainability. Sustainability is now a high priority and businesses

decisions that businesses make. (8 marks)

through reduced fuel consumption whilst also reducing emissions.
Logica | Using skills to respond to the external environment

55

NESTLE

29/8/12

10:30

Page 2

ENVIRONMENT

Creating Shared Value in the supply chain

Introduction

Nestlé works within the secondary sector of industry, creating and
supplying products to customers. It converts raw materials into

Nestlé is the world’s leading nutrition, health and wellness

finished goods for consumers to enjoy. Raw materials used in

company. It employs around 330,000 people and has

many of Nestlé’s products are sourced from the primary sector.

461 factories in 83 countries around the world; almost half of

For example, Nestlé brands such as KIT KAT, AERO® and

these are in developing countries. In the UK, Nestlé employs more

SMARTIES contain cocoa sourced from cocoa farmers around

than 7,000 people across 19 sites. The company is one of the UK

the world.

and Ireland’s major exporters, exporting over £300 million worth of
products every year to over 50 countries around the world.

Nestlé works with cocoa farmers in order to help them run
profitable farms and eliminate child labour, whilst developing a

Nestlé is a household name within the UK, producing some of

sustainable supply of cocoa for Nestlé products.

Britain’s most popular brands such as KIT KAT®, NESCAFÉ®,
SMARTIES®, GO CAT® and SHREDDIES®. Over one billion
KIT KATs are produced in the UK every year.

This case study looks at the importance of applying the principles
of corporate social responsibility to a business’ activities. It will
demonstrate how Nestlé creates shared value within its cocoa

Nestlé has a series of corporate business principles designed to
guide the way in which the organisation and its employees

supply chain to enhance the lives of cocoa farmers whilst also
improving the quality of its products for consumers.

operate. These principles are at the basis of Nestlé’s culture and
aim to protect the trust of its consumers and other stakeholders.
The principles and their associated policies are concerned with

Corporate Social Responsibility

activities related to:

In Business Studies curriculum terms, Corporate Social

• consumers

Responsibility (CSR) involves the business taking a broad view of

• human rights and labour practices

its activities, looking beyond profits for shareholders and focusing

• employees

on other stakeholders. A stakeholder is anyone that has an

• suppliers and customers

interest in or may affect the decisions and actions of a business.

• the environment.

Stakeholders can be internal or external to the business. Internal
stakeholders include employees and shareholders. External
stakeholders include suppliers, customers, the communities in
which the business operates and the environment.
For companies like Nestlé, which work with suppliers from a range
of countries, many in poorer regions of the world, it is becoming
increasingly important to take a wider view of its responsibilities.
Nestlé believes for a company to be successful in the long term
and create value for its shareholders, it must also create value for
society. It calls this Creating Shared Value.

56

Curriculum topics covered: • Corporate Social Responsibility
• Supply chain • Benefits of responsible behaviour • Stakeholders

NESTLE

29/8/12

10:30

Page 3

Nestlé actively seeks engagement and partnerships with external
stakeholders to optimise positive impact. It aims to use the power
of its core activities and partnerships for the joint benefit of the
people in the countries where it operates and of its shareholders.
Global principles and goals set by organisations such as the
United Nations also help to shape a company’s approach to
corporate social responsibility. For example, Nestlé’s Corporate
Business Principles incorporate the 10 United Nations Global
Compact Principles on Human Rights, Labour, the Environment
and Corruption. Nestlé is an active member of several of the
Compact’s Working Groups and Initiatives.
Creating Shared Value has become an integral part of the way in
which Nestlé does business. It is based on compliance with
international laws and codes of conduct, the company’s business
principles and a focus on environmental sustainability. However,
Creating Shared Value goes beyond compliance and sustainability.
It aims to create new and greater value for society and
shareholders in the areas where the company can have the
biggest impact – nutrition, water and rural development. These are
core to its business activities and vital for its value chain:
• Water: because the ongoing quality and availability of it is
critical to life, to the production of food and to Nestlé’s
operations.
• Rural development: because the overall well-being of farmers,
rural communities, workers and small businesses and suppliers
is intrinsic to the long-term success of Nestlé’s business.
• Nutrition: because food and nutrition are the basis of health
and of Nestlé’s business as the leading Nutrition, Health and
Wellness company.

Creating Shared Value along the supply
chain – The Nestlé Cocoa Plan
Supply chain activities transform natural resources and raw materials
into finished products which are delivered to the end consumer. Each
stage of the process adds value to the overall end product.

Creating
Shared Value
Water, nutrition, rural
development

.........................................................................................
..........................................
........................................

Nestlé operates within complex supply chains. Its cocoa supply
chain goes from cocoa bean to chocolate bar. This path starts
with cocoa from farmers, who grow the crops; to cooperatives,
which manage the sale of the crops; to processors and
manufacturers, such as Nestlé which create chocolate products;

Environmental sustainability
Protect the future

to retailers such as supermarkets; and finally to consumers who
purchase the products.

..........................................................................................
...................................................................
.................................................................

The Supply Chain

Compliance
Laws,business principles, codes of conduct

Farmers

www.thetimes100.co.uk

Cooperatives

Processors/
manufacturers

Retailers

Consumers

57

NESTLE

29/8/12

10:30

Page 4

However, it also aims to ensure a sustainable and high quality
supply of cocoa for Nestlé in the long-term. Some of the areas it
focuses on to achieve this are improved farmer training, buying
from cooperatives and paying a premium, and working with
certification programmes such as Fairtrade. This creates value
through the supply chain, particularly for farmers and their families
along the way.
The Cocoa Plan has become a key way in which Nestlé is tackling
issues facing cocoa farmers as well as their families and
communities. Nestlé sources most of its cocoa production from
Côte d’Ivoire. Both the quality and quantity of cocoa supplies are
in decline. The average cocoa farmer is over 55 years old and so
the industry needs to consider where the next generation of cocoa
farmers will come from. Many younger people in the region are
Nestlé sources materials from thousands of farms, many of them

leaving the countryside to work in cities. As a result there is a

small farmers in poorer rural regions of the world. In many rural

shortage of labour and skills. Ultimately, the aim is to raise the

communities, a lack of investment in infrastructure has a serious

standard of living of cocoa farmers to ensure a new generation of

impact on the quality and quantity of raw materials that Nestlé and

cocoa farmers will take over and benefit.

other companies rely on. Nestlé provides training in order to
encourage sustainable production, protect the supply and quality

Benefits of responsible behaviour

of its raw materials and have a positive, long-term impact on the
local economy and farmers’ standards of living.

The Cocoa Plan is a clear example of Nestlé Creating Shared Value
both for the company and for cocoa farmers, their families and their

Around two-thirds of Nestlé’s worldwide expenditure is on raw

local communities. Through it, Nestlé benefits from ensuring the

materials. Nearly 40% of this goes on three main ingredients: milk,

supply of high-quality and sustainably sourced cocoa for its products.

coffee and cocoa. Cocoa is the main ingredient in chocolate and

It also ensures it supports the cocoa farming community’s

as such is vital to Nestlé. It comes from cocoa beans that grow in

development and meets certified ethical and environmental standards.

a pod on a cocoa tree.
Nestlé’s focus on improving supply has delivered benefits in
The Nestlé Cocoa Plan was launched in October 2009 in the Côte

many areas:

d’Ivoire, Africa. It is a prime example of Nestlé’s Creating Shared

a) Investing in plant research - By developing higher quality

Value approach to business and involves investment of £67 million

seedlings which produce typically 50%–200% more cocoa, this

between 2010 and 2020, building on £37 million in the 15 years

enables cocoa farmers to grow more and sustain a higher

before the plan. The initiative aims to help cocoa farmers to run

income. Nestlé has set up a Research and Development Centre

profitable farms, respect the environment, have a good quality of

in Abidjan in the Côte d’Ivoire to support the development of

life and give their children a better education.

higher-yielding, disease-tolerant cocoa plantlets.
b) Investing in training farmers – Training farmers to understand
better crop management techniques and pest management, as
well as improving their awareness of child labour issues helps
to improve outputs and boosts farmers’ incomes.
c) Improving social conditions – Nestlé has set up a partnership
with the World Cocoa Foundation to build and repair schools
within the cocoa farming regions and support cocoa farmers
and their families. This will mean that attending school will
become a more attractive and viable option for parents and
children and that the risk of child labour will be reduced.
d) The Fairtrade and UTZ labels – Crops are certificated under the
Fairtrade label. Nestlé pays a premium for its cocoa beans, which

58

www.thetimes100.co.uk

NESTLE

29/8/12

10:30

Page 5

www.nestle.co.uk

improves the growers’ levels of income and helps to secure the

• Stakeholder convenings, held in various countries where Nestlé

future growth of communities. Nestlé is also the first food

has operations, communicate its approach and invite feedback

company to join the Fair Labor Association (FLA) and has its

on its Creating Shared Value efforts.

work in Côte d’Ivoire assessed openly and independently.

• The Nestlé Supplier Code establishes the minimum standards
that its suppliers, their employees, agents and subcontractors

The Cocoa Plan is an evolving and growing programme. Each

need to meet. This demonstrates how Nestlé is committed to

year more cooperatives of farmers are being added to the plan.

developing responsible practices right through its supply chain.

The plan has also been extended to other countries such as
Indonesia, Ghana, Venezuela and Ecuador.

• The Nestlé corporate website contains information on all
company policies, principles and activities.
• There are dedicated websites to key projects such as the

Communicating with stakeholders

Cocoa Plan. These sites bring together all the detail of the
initiative in an easy-to-read and understandable way.

Effective communication with stakeholders is also an important

• This case study aims to help to reveal to young people the

element of responsible business behaviour. For Nestlé, engaging

complexities of global supply chains and how companies such

with stakeholders underpins Creating Shared Value. It enables it to

as Nestlé respond to these issues.

identify emerging issues, shape its responses and continue to
drive improvements in its performance. Topics raised by

The Cocoa Plan has led to numerous partnerships with other

stakeholders are discussed with them in a variety of local and

organisations such as the Fair Labor Association and the Red

international forums. These include: nutrition, health and wellness;

Cross/Red Crescent societies. These relationships help Nestlé to

education and access; Nestlé’s role in public policy issues;

fight illegal labour practices. Nestlé also has partnerships with

auditing and disclosure of infant formula marketing practices; and

supply chain organisations and governments which support good

food safety.

agricultural practices. These practices have created benefits for
stakeholders across the industry, including consumers,
shareholders, farmers and other partners. For example, one
partnering initiative with the Co-operative Group is paying for
educational packs for schools in the Côte d’Ivoire region.

Conclusion
Creating Shared Value has enabled Nestlé to adopt a wider focus
to its responsibilities. In doing so, it has been able to bring about a
whole series of benefits to stakeholders, whether they are farmers
and their communities, shareholders or consumers.
The Cocoa Plan is Nestlé’s way of dealing with issues facing
cocoa farmers and their communities. This is a long-term process
that has created better outcomes for all involved in the cocoa
industry. It has enabled Nestlé to support local communities as
well as improving both the quality and output of cocoa.

1. Describe what is meant by the supply chain. (2 marks)

For example:
• Through Nestlé’s annual reports and Creating Shared Value
reports, stakeholders can see where funds are invested, how
the company is addressing issues such as environmental
performance and the positive impact of Creating Shared

industries. (4 marks)
3. Using examples from the case study, analyse how
Nestlé’s Creating Shared Value contributes to its
corporate social responsibility activities. (6 marks)
4. Evaluate how the values of an organisation can be used

Exam-style questions

2. Explain the difference between primary and secondary
Nestlé engages with stakeholders through a variety of ways.

to benefit the different groups of stakeholders. (8 marks)

Value activities.
Nestlé | Creating Shared Value in the supply chain

59

NETWORK RAIL STUDY

29/8/12

10:31

Page 2

PEOPLE

Managing change through training and development

Network Rail faced huge challenges when it took on these

Introduction

responsibilities ten years ago. At the time, the rail network faced a
Britain relies on rail. The railway is a vital part of Britain’s economy

number of problems. Trains were late, costs were high and there

and infrastructure. More people travel by rail now than since the

had been a lack of investment in both people and equipment.

1920s, even though there are 50% fewer rail routes now than in

These issues meant that there was low public confidence in the

the 1960s. Every day Network Rail gets three million people to

rail network.

their destinations. It also moves thousands of tonnes of goods
around Britain. Rail is a greener and safer mode of transport than

Since then, Network Rail has focused on a sustained programme

car so it is no surprise that passenger numbers have increased by

to bring down costs. New ways of working have reduced costs by

more than 40% in the past ten years. These numbers are

28%, largely due to economies of scale. Track and equipment has

expected to double by 2034.

been renewed and punctuality has risen to over 90%. Major
projects have been delivered on time and to budget, leading to

Network Rail is the business responsible for the tracks, bridges

more public confidence in the service. Network Rail has changed

and tunnels that make up the British rail network. These, along

its focus to ‘predict and prevent’ rather than the previous ‘find and

with signalling and level crossings, form the railway’s infrastructure.

fix’. This is both more cost-effective and efficient and helps to

Its responsibility extends to 20,000 miles of track and 40,000

avoid delay or disruption to journeys for passengers. Between

bridges and tunnels. It also runs 18 of Britain’s major rail stations,

2009 and 2014, Network Rail will have invested around £12 billion

from Edinburgh Waverley to London King’s Cross. Network Rail’s

in the rail network. Britain now has the fastest growing network in

job is to keep all of these services running both efficiently and

Europe. This case study examines the role of people in improving

above all safely. Its mission is ‘to provide a safe, reliable and

the rail network and the British economy.

efficient railway fit for the 21st century.’

HR strategy
Network Rail invests in people and, in so doing, invests in its
future. It is one of Britain’s biggest employers, with 35,000
employees. It offers a broad range of roles, from maintenance and
signalling engineers to project managers. There are opportunities
in all functional areas. These include specialists in human
resources (HR), information technology (IT), finance and customer
service. To achieve its work programme Network Rail needs to
recruit and retain talented engineers. Its engineers are currently
working on some of the most exciting projects in Europe. These
include HS2, the new high-speed rail link between the north and
south of Britain, and the London Crossrail project. There are also
major upgrades to some of the country’s biggest and busiest
stations, like London King’s Cross and Birmingham New Street.
60

Curriculum topics covered: • HR strategy • Training
• Development • Roles and responsibilities

NETWORK RAIL STUDY

29/8/12

10:31

Page 3

Training
To maintain the quality of staff, Network Rail has put major
investment into improving the knowledge and skills of its
workforce. It operates a ‘learning for life’ policy and staff are
expected to continue learning throughout their careers. Training is
usually defined as being job-related. It provides staff with new or
improved skills so that they can carry out a role or task better.
Training staff brings a number of benefits to a business. It makes
staff more efficient and therefore they produce more output. At the
same time it improves safety and reduces the risk of accidents.
Workers become more flexible, allowing the business to use them
in whatever areas they are needed. This can also help to improve
Network Rail’s vision is to improve the rail network by providing
faster and more reliable journeys. Network Rail’s HR strategy

motivation. The provision of good training has led both to higher
quality applicants and to better customer satisfaction.

focus is on recruiting a diverse workforce. This not only gives
depth to the culture of the business but also ensures that it can
access the widest pool of talent. To make sure it has a continuous
stream of the right talent to keep its long-term projects on-track, it
offers training to suit all applicants, whether school leavers or
graduates, male or female. The company also offers a range of
opportunities for employees to acquire recognised qualifications,
including a unique postgraduate programme, sponsoring a
Master’s degree in project management, and apprenticeships. In
addition, it provides development opportunities for employees to
make sure that their knowledge and skills meet its world-class
standards. Many of Network Rail’s current senior engineers and
managers started their careers through these programmes.

The UK is currently facing a shortage of young people with skills in
technology and engineering. This is partly due to fewer young
people taking qualifications in science and maths in further and
higher education. Network Rail has recognised that it needs to fill
this gap. It has therefore put in place high quality training to make
sure that it has people with the right skills it requires in the future.
There are two main types of training – ‘on-the-job’, which is
training based in the workplace, and ‘off-the-job’ which is based
at a college or other learning centre. Network Rail has developed
many such centres to fulfil its specific needs. It currently has 26
modern training centres across Britain. It has invested £23 million
in four new state-of-the-art workforce development centres
(WDCs) in Scotland, Kent, Bristol and Walsall.
These allow it to train up to 100 frontline engineering and
maintenance people at once. Examples of off-the-job training at the
Walsall centre include practical training on a purpose-built 60 metre
stretch of internal track with signalling and 150 metres of outdoor
track. Trainees learn how to practise procedures in controlled
environments that they can then use when they return to the
British Rail network. On-the-job training includes trainees
accompanying mentors, for instance, when fixing signalling issues,
and learning hands-on how to maintain the network effectively.

www.thetimes100.co.uk

61

NETWORK RAIL STUDY

29/8/12

10:31

Page 4

The Graduate Programme helps Network Rail to build the leaders
of the future. Graduates control the pace and content of their
work so that they can progress at their own rate. They gain key
experience on a range of placements and receive regular reviews
of their progress and performance. There are opportunities in all
engineering disciplines (civil, mechanical and electrical). Trainees
work on some of the biggest engineering projects in Europe and
get involved in management and decision-making roles in all
functional areas.

Development
Once trained, Network Rail makes sure that its employees have
access to development opportunities. Development is about
enhancing relevant skills, qualities and knowledge to give a person
The Advanced Apprenticeship Scheme is a three-year programme,

greater competency. People who take development opportunities

designed for young people aged over 17 with at least 4 GCSEs.

can move into more challenging, higher level roles. However, there

Both boys and girls are encouraged to apply. This is the largest

is the risk that a person who has better skills can more easily find

scheme of its type in Britain and allows young people to earn while

another job elsewhere. Network Rail recognises this risk, but

they learn. Apprentices spend a year training with the Royal Navy

knows that it is balanced by the excellent opportunities and

at Europe’s largest engineering training facility at HMS Sultan in

conditions that it offers. The development programmes that it runs

Hampshire. Here they learn both technical and leadership skills.

lead to further nationally recognised qualifications ranging from

A further two years are spent in on-the-job training around Britain,

NVQs and HNCs through to degrees and diplomas. These are all

returning to HMS Sultan for additional courses and learning. At

backed by a university, college or professional body as appropriate.

Network Rail’s own training centres a mixture of classroom learning
and job-related experience is given.

Network Rail also offers employees the chance to take part in its
Network Rail uses its own expert engineers as trainers. This means

own leadership programme. This is designed to develop

that apprentices gain knowledge from people with direct experience

employees so that they can take on managerial roles. It is held at

of rail issues and projects. By the end of the apprenticeship, young

the Westwood Leadership Development Centre in Coventry, in

people have the knowledge, qualifications and experience to

partnership with the University of Warwick and is available to

become engineers in a number of rail-related areas. These include

employees at all levels of the business. Every year thousands of

track, signals, electrification and overhead lines. In addition to being

Network Rail staff benefit from this course. They develop the skills

paid, apprentices are given accommodation whilst training,

and strategic knowledge to help the company deliver its

subsidised rail travel and generous annual leave.

challenging goals and targets.

62

www.thetimes100.co.uk

NETWORK RAIL STUDY

2/10/12

14:11

Page 5

www.networkrail.co.uk

Katie is a project management assistant. She provides support to
the whole team for the day-to-day management of a wide variety
of projects. These must run to time and within cost budgets. To
maintain quality across projects requires a highly organised and
flexible person. Katie’s duties include working with both paper and
people. She:
• monitors progress and produces programme reports
• develops effective ways to manage change
• deals with internal and external customers and stakeholders.

Conclusion
From a position where public confidence was low, Network Rail has
improved rail efficiency and customer satisfaction. Whilst keeping
safety as its central focus, it has also invested in the future. Network
Rail has dramatically increased the punctuality of its services and
aims to continue to improve on this success. Part of this is due to
Network Rail’s vision and values, which have been used to underpin

Careers at Network Rail

its training programme. High quality training, from apprenticeships to
There are career opportunities at all levels within Network Rail,

Master’s level, makes sure that the business has the best engineers

within all the main functional areas. This means not just

and the best leaders. Its investment in the future is tied up in its

opportunities in engineering, but also in many other disciplines. All

investment in people. It recruits and retains the best people for a

of the jobs benefit from Network Rail’s commitment to excellence

wide range of jobs and roles. It is able to go forward with some of

through its training and development programmes.

the most challenging, but also the most exciting engineering
projects in Europe.

Bill is a track maintenance operative. This job is vital to ensure the
safety of the public. Bill works to stringent safety guidelines and is
committed to carrying out reliable, faultless work. Network Rail
has its own in-house maintenance team and provides them with
protective clothing and, of course, training. Track maintenance
operatives work carefully to maintain safely all the signal, track,
power and telecoms equipment across 20,000 miles of track
in Britain.

‘This is a mostly outdoors role; I use both automated and
manual tools to carry out general maintenance on the
track. This can include anything from lookout duties for the
team to highly complex work’.

Bill

1. Describe how Network Rail influences Britain’s
economy. (2 marks)

make sure trains run safely and on time. Cho needs to be able to
make decisions quickly and calmly. Signallers are responsible for
maintaining Network Rail’s high standards with calm and
methodical decision-making. Skills required for this job include
being able to take the lead, being assertive and being in
command of many different situations. Good communication

and development. (4 marks)
3. Analyse the benefits of Network Rail’s Advanced
Apprenticeship scheme as a means of developing new
recruits. (6 marks)
4. Evaluate the various methods that Network Rail uses

Exam-style questions

2. Explain the similarities and differences between training
Cho is a signaller. She operates the signals and points that help

to train and develop its employees. Which do you think
are most effective? Explain your answer. (8 marks)

skills are therefore vital.
Network Rail | Managing change through training and development

63

OPITO/CIPS STUDY

29/8/12

10:31

Page 2

O P E R AT I O N S

The importance of sustainable purchasing and supply

Purchasing and supply focuses on sourcing, pricing and buying

Introduction

the right things, at the right price and at the right time in order to
What would happen if Christmas trees were not available until

deliver a service or product. Effective purchasing can help an

Easter? How would you feel if you tried to buy a coffee at your

organisation to reduce costs, maintain quality and manage the

favourite high street café only to be told they had run out of coffee

levels of risk to its supply chain. The scale or importance of the

beans? Making sure the key components that a business or

item is relative to the level of risk to the business. Missing coffee

service relies on are available when needed is the responsibility of

beans will affect the day’s profits; getting the wrong size of engine

the purchasing role.

for a car could close down the production line.

Purchasing and supply – also known as procurement - may
Innovation and creativity

appear to be a ‘hidden’ function in many organisations. In fact,
procurement is a highly strategic role, whether the organisation is

Managing supply chain risk

manufacturing or service-orientated, in the public or private sector,

Ethics and sustainability

for profit or not. Procurement is complex. It covers the full supply

Managing demand

chain from contracts (negotiating), procurement (purchasing) and

Reducing all supply chain costs

logistics (storage/distribution).

Increasing
complexity

All businesses need inputs in order to be able to operate. These

Right price and quality
Right stuff,
right time,
right place

might be physical inputs, such as raw materials, like engine
components for a car manufacturer. They may also be service
based, such as specialist engineering consultancy when trialling
new technology or distribution services for a high street retailer. It

For the oil and gas industry with its high levels of risk, the

is vital that inputs not only meet the required quality and reliability

Chartered Institute of Purchasing & Supply (CIPS) is providing

standards, but also that they are competitively priced.

training to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of purchasing
and supply. OPITO, the focal point for skills, learning and
development in the oil and gas industry, undertook a labour
market survey of the industry which identified a sector-wide skills
shortage. Oil & Gas UK then undertook a supply chain survey. This
showed that there is both a current shortage and a likely future
need for purchasing and supply chain specialists for the oil and
gas industry.
CIPS and OPITO are therefore working together to promote career
opportunities and develop specialised training to meet this need.
This case study explores the role of purchasing and supply in the
oil and gas industry.

64

Curriculum topics covered: • Supply chain • Purchasing and supply
• Skills • Sustainability

OPITO/CIPS STUDY

29/8/12

10:31

Page 3

Procurement managers are also involved in researching suppliers
in new markets and developing new and innovative procurement
methods to improve effectiveness. They also agree and manage
service level agreements (SLAs). An SLA is a contract that
specifies standards, timings and payments for the supply along
with penalties for missing targets. It sets out the responsibilities
and expectations for both the business (the buyer) and its
suppliers. A key element of the SLA is ensuring that the price
quoted by suppliers will not be subject to change, thus affecting
the purchasing budget.
Longer term purchaser and supplier relationships can provide

The purchasing and supply role

stability and add value to both parties. The purchaser may be able
to get the best possible terms and prices or a supplier may ‘go

Every business, from an NHS hospital to the biggest brands in the

the extra mile’ for the business in an urgent situation. This type of

world such as Coca-Cola or McDonalds, needs supplies.

collaboration builds trust between buyer and supplier, which might

Purchasing may involve the day-to-day necessities like

enable a just-in-time relationship, where both parties hold

photocopier paper, soap and towels for wash rooms or service

minimum stock and so reduce costs.

support for IT equipment. However, the purchasing role also
covers high-tech or large scale equipment for major projects such

Purchasing and supply in oil and gas

as the building of an aircraft carrier or the Olympic stadium, as

The oil and gas industry is divided into the ‘upstream’ and

well as the skills required to operate it.

‘downstream’ operations. Upstream involves exploring for oil and
gas and extracting it safely. The downstream part of the industry is

Purchasing and supply roles therefore require high levels of skill.

concerned with refining, distribution and sales. The oil and gas

CIPS is the professional body which aims to promote the highest

industry has very long supply chains. Many companies may be

standards of excellence in purchasing and supply management

involved in supplying the materials, components and services at

across all industries. It provides these through its professional

different stages and across the various processes involved in

qualifications programme, focused training and education and by

extracting, refining and distributing oil and gas. Procurement

rigorous assessment procedures.

becomes even more important in this type of global operation.
A company such as BP sources services and supplies from many

Those involved in purchasing and supply are in a position to

different countries. These include mechanical and electrical parts,

consider every stage of a business’ processes, from raw materials

professional services such as project management or legal

to waste management. This ‘helicopter view’ can help a

expertise for drawing up contracts.

procurement manager to spot ways of making efficiencies or
opportunities to improve the quality of products or services bought.

Reliability is a crucial factor in supply, both of quality and timing. If

They can see not just internal impacts, but also what is happening

supplies are of poor quality, delivered late or cost more than was

in the external environment and the marketplace. This can help to

agreed, this will affect productivity and profitability. If production is

generate new ideas to add value to the business, identify how it

delayed or faulty products need to be scrapped, this can reduce

can increase competitive advantage or improve sustainability.

profits. Poor quality inputs could also affect the safety of the
process – a major consideration in the oil and gas industry.

An example of how vital the role is occurred when BP needed to
manage the supply chain of emergency goods following the

For example, to help improve safety and quality of supply, BP is

Deepwater Horizon oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010. The

introducing safety performance indicators into contracts of

supply chain team had to source everything from mealworms to

suppliers involved in high risk activities. Suppliers who do not

feed wounded birds, to booms to prevent the oil spreading further,

meet these standards may be removed from contracts. As part of

to dispersant materials to remove the oil. The challenges included

this safety focus, BP is also planning to reduce use of agency staff

finding sufficiently large quantities available quickly as well as trying

in procurement roles and boost its in-house expertise in supply

to keep budgets under control.

chain management.

www.thetimes100.co.uk

65

OPITO/CIPS STUDY

29/8/12

10:31

Page 4

An important decision for many businesses is whether to carry out a
particular part of its process itself (‘make’) or buy in the components
or expertise it needs. This decision might depend on, for example,
whether the skills and capacity are available in-house; whether there
is a need for high security of supply; or whether it is simply cheaper
to outsource. For example, an oil company could choose to rent or
own an oil platform. If it rents, its costs are limited to the rental
period, with repairs and maintenance the responsibility of the owner.
Buying outright might cost more initially but the company has the
benefit of the asset. However, it also has the issues and costs of
maintenance and ultimately, disposal. Purchasing managers work
with operational managers to consider these issues and find the
most cost-effective and efficient solution for the business.

For example, Shell is working with its existing suppliers to
implement the Shell Supplier Principles. These set out the minimum

Sustainable procurement

standards which Shell suppliers need to meet. These include using

Other key factors to consider when choosing a supplier include

impact on the environment and cover health and safety issues.

energy and natural resources as efficiently as possible to minimise

their ability to respond quickly to changing customer needs and
how well they can help towards meeting a business’ sustainability

Other aspects of sustainable business include managing waste

goals. CIPS offers a structured online audit process to help

effectively and reducing the company’s carbon footprint. This can

purchasing managers map their organisations’ purchasing

be improved by choosing suppliers who also take their

systems against best practice. This enables them to assess how

responsibilities towards environmental impact seriously. For

energy efficient and sustainable their purchasing processes are.

example, Marks & Spencer made £70 million of efficiency savings
during 2010/11. Alongside reductions in waste and packaging and

Sustainable procurement is a high profile matter for businesses

increased energy efficiency, the company is working with suppliers

today. It can help to save money, reduce waste, improve

to reduce carbon emissions in the supply chain by improving

competitiveness and build a business’ reputation. As part of their

efficiency of deliveries.

sustainability programmes, many oil companies have invested in
local transportation networks or built schools. They provide jobs

Roles and skills

and by sourcing supplies locally help to develop the local economy.
Although engineering and technical roles are crucial in the oil and
The global oil industry has a responsibility to the countries in which
it operates to manage its operations in as sustainable way as
possible. A purchasing manager might want to consider whether
the supplier behaves responsibly, for example, adhering to ethical
standards or sourcing raw materials in an ethical way.

gas industry, oil companies also require lawyers, accountants,
geologists, electricians, plumbers, crane drivers, mechanics, divers
and designers. Roles in purchasing and supply cover all levels,
from operational such as buyers and store managers, to strategic
such as in supply chain analysis or strategic sourcing, so there are
opportunities for everyone.
Entry levels vary. Many people join oil and gas companies after
having worked in other industries. Some young people join the
industry straight from school; others after a college or university
course. For example, Hannah has a degree in mathematics and
economics.
‘I wanted a career that would offer variety and challenge.
As a purchasing manager I have both. My job has given
me a detailed knowledge of different parts of the oil and
gas industry, plus a significant amount of responsibility.’

66

www.thetimes100.co.uk

OPITO/CIPS STUDY

29/8/12

10:31

Page 5

www.opito.com www.cips.org

Graeme is a group procurement and supply chain manager with
over 25 years experience in the industry. With an engineering

‘Purchasing and supply is a powerful and highly

background, he did not originally consider purchasing and supply

responsible role, dealing with high value contracts. The

as a career but got a taste for the challenges of the procurement

real satisfaction I get is from seeing what I do make a

role when he spent six months in the job as part of his degree.

huge difference. I really enjoy my job and see my long
term future career in this industry.’

‘The procurement process in oil and gas is complex, with
a key reliance on safety. In addition, some of the materials
we use in this industry are highly specialised, which can

Conclusion

mean long lead times for purchase. However, the

Well-managed procurement ensures that supplies of the required

engineers or companies needing the materials expect very

quality are available at the right time, place and cost. Supply chain

quick responses, so management and forecasting to

managers help to:

anticipate their needs is highly important.’

• reduce costs and improve profitability – bulk buying can
provide economies of scale

People involved in purchasing need business knowledge and the
ability to analyse markets. CIPS provides six levels of qualifications
for the procurement and supply profession across the world. All
UK qualifications are Ofqual (the Office of Qualifications and
Examinations Regulator) accredited and appear on the Register of
Regulated Qualifications. Students may start a CIPS qualification
with no entry requirements.

• reduce waste by selecting inputs that generate less waste (and
also lower costs)
• manage demand, for example, through just-in-time supply
• improve cash flow by securing favourable prices and
payment terms
• improve efficiency by making sure suppliers hit deadlines
• improve the competitiveness of the business by seeking out
innovative products and services to add value.

Steve is head of global procurement and supply chain

In the oil and gas industry, where safety is a central concern,

management at Prosafe, a leading owner and operator of oil and

effective management of purchasing and supply is a vital role. Its

gas rigs.

procurement managers need to have good people skills, sound
common sense, commercial and business skills and the ability to

‘Procurement is a highly strategic role. The oil and gas

communicate appropriately at all levels. OPITO and CIPS are

industry supports the whole world economy, from the fuel

working together to ensure that the industry has the relevant

in vehicles to plastic paperclips. My company provides oil

training and qualifications programmes to meet the long-term

companies with accommodation vessels which are like

needs of the oil and gas industry.

floating hotels. Deliveries might reach a platform only once
a week, so every last detail from wi-fi access and toilet
paper to all the operational and engineering requirements
has to be in place, at the right time, in the right quantity
and quality. Young people may not be aware of how
interesting it is to work in purchasing and supply chain
roles - there is no “standard day”. I love it and I believe the
job I do makes a difference.’
1. Describe what is meant by procurement. (2 marks)
equipment and services and deals with contracts that range in
value from £1 million to £60 million. His role includes careful
assessment of the effectiveness of each supplier to ensure BP is
getting value for money. This is a large responsibility and it may

2. Explain the benefits that effective purchasing and
supply brings to a business. (4 marks)
3. Analyse why the selection of suppliers is such an
important issue in the oil and gas industry. (6 marks)
4. Evaluate the key skills needed by a good procurement

involve deciding whether or not to change supplier. This is a major

manager. Which of these do you think is most

decision as it carries potential risk to the company and the

important? (8 marks)

Exam-style questions

Muhib is a procurement specialist at BP. He sources both

continuation of its operations.
OPITO • CIPS | The importance of sustainable purchasing and supply

67

PORTAKABIN STUDY

29/8/12

10:32

Page 2

O P E R AT I O N S

Adding value through health and safety

Introduction

the process. For example, there are 90% fewer vehicle
movements to site in modular construction when compared with

Adding value to a product involves making it more desirable and

traditional construction methods.

better for the final consumer. Ways of adding value to a product or
service include improved design and functionality. For many

The overall responsibility for health and safety in a company rests

products one of the most important ways of adding value is

with the Board of Directors. They ensure that effective H&S

through health and safety (H&S). This is particularly true in the

policies and practices are in place in the company and that they

construction industry where customers, employees and the wider

demonstrate a commitment to health and safety being promoted.

public expect buildings to be safe as well as attractive.

However, health and safety is also the responsibility of everyone
who works for a company. Training is vital to ensure that everyone

Portakabin is part of the Shepherd Group. This is a family

understands what is expected of them.

company which preserves all the benefits of family values. These
benefits include caring for employees, valuing the communities

Often the importance of health and safety and how it is achieved

to which it supplies modular buildings, as well as the local

can be overlooked when analysing business practices. This case

community in York where the company is based.

study explains in detail how Portakabin implements health and
safety policy and highlights the benefits this brings to the business.

The Portakabin brand is the most widely recognised brand in
modular construction in the UK. Portakabin modular buildings
provide high quality working environments for many other

The importance of
health and safety at work

businesses and organisations, for example, office buildings and
schools through to hospitals and hospitality suites.

Focusing on health and safety protects employees in every activity
that they carry out. Health and safety also protects customers and the

Health and safety policies form a key component of the Portakabin

wider public as well as contractors working for a company. Operating

Corporate Social Responsibility document and are an integral part

primarily in the European market Portakabin needs to take account of

of the business where it is actively promoted through a diverse

both UK and European Union health and safety legislation. The

working culture. Portakabin not only constructs and sells new

construction industry has its own additional regulations covering

modular buildings but also hires out buildings, for example, when

aspects of design and management and safe working practices.

a school needs interim accommodation quickly. Therefore, health
and safety is a key consideration in each of these situations,
especially in relation to a safe environment for children to work and
play in throughout the school day.
Modular building is at least 37.7% safer than traditional
construction methods. Modular buildings are produced in a factory
and then assembled at the construction site. The materials are
relatively safe to transport. They can be assembled quickly using
standard procedures and checks, reducing risk at every stage of
68

Curriculum topics covered: • Importance of H&S • H&S legislation
• Implementing H&S • Business benefits of H&S

PORTAKABIN STUDY

29/8/12

10:32

Page 3

As the leading supplier of modular buildings in the UK, Portakabin

Health and safety legislation

has set itself the goal of being the best company in its industry in
relation to health and safety. This includes setting standards for

Companies have overall responsibility for the health and safety of their

contractors (e.g. transport companies and suppliers of components).

employees and others. The responsibility of the company relates to

Portakabin takes its duty of care to employees, customers and

creating and implementing the overall framework, e.g. policies,

visitors very seriously. Strict health and safety policies are in place at

procedures and training which creates a good health and safety culture.

all company sites. Proven safety procedures are used when working
on customer sites such as safe driving guidelines. These are issued

However, under the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974, employees

to all employees to create benefits all round.

also have responsibilities. Employees’ responsibilities include:
• to take reasonable care of their own health and safety
• to take reasonable care not to put other people – fellow
employees and members of the public – at risk by what they

Contractors

do or do not do in the course of their work
• to cooperate with their employer, making sure they understand
The business Portakabin

Customers

To carry out risk management effectively a company needs to

Who benefits
from health
& safety?
Employees

and follow the company’s health and safety policies.

have an overall safety management system. Portakabin has a
safety management system that includes the following elements:
Visitors

• a general statement of intent (commitment to health and safety)
• identification of who is responsible for H&S
• reporting structure (what H&S reports will be produced, by
whom and for whom)

Portakabin has recently achieved OHSAS 18001 certification at its

• arrangements for H&S (the actual details of H&S practice)

York manufacturing site. This is the internationally recognised

• identification of legal requirements and how these are being met

British Standard for Occupational Health and Safety

• objectives and targets (setting the internal standards to be achieved)

Management Systems.

• monitoring and measuring (e.g. recording incidents to check

To achieve the certificate Portakabin was required to demonstrate

• periodic review for continual improvement (e.g. recording

objectives are met)
that it complied with a specific set of criteria and standards.

incidents/accidents to check incidents are closed).

Requirement

Portakabin response

Implementation of an occupational health and safety management

Documented procedures for consulting and communicating with employees,

programme

customers and others about health and safety aspects and issues

Risk policies where risks are regularly assessed and controls are in place

Risks and hazards are regularly assessed and controls are put in place to

to remove or limit risks

remove or limit hazard exposure therefore reducing the risk factors as far as
reasonably practicable. For example, safe work instructions, risk assessments
and the requirement to wear PPE such as safety glasses, gloves, helmets and
safety clothing when welding or working with chemicals

Guidelines and structures setting out responsibilities for health

Detailed procedures, risk registers that identify significant risk to others and

and safety

clear operating procedures (e.g. design elements, manufacturing risks for
assembly and loading and unloading of the finished building)

Measuring and monitoring of health and safety understanding and

Encouragement of reporting of accidents, incidents and near-misses by

performance to ensure continual improvement

every employee for assessment, trend analysis and any further corrective
action plan

www.thetimes100.co.uk

69

PORTAKABIN STUDY

29/8/12

10:32

Page 4

Risk identification
and management
of significant risk

Continual measuring
and monitoring through
auditing and
management reviews

Implementation
includes key roles
with clear
responsibility
for managing H&S

Risk H&S policy

Organisational
structure;
training specific
to the role

One of the most important parts of the safety management
system at Portakabin is the identification of where responsibility
for H&S lies. Portakabin has put in place comprehensive
documentation that clearly shows what employees are
responsible for:
• Taking care of their own health and safety and that of fellow
employees.
• Understanding the health and safety policy and carrying out
their work safely.
• Ensuring that all protective equipment is properly used and
looked after.
• Reporting any accidents/incidents or near-misses which might
lead to injury.
• Using the correct tools and equipment in line with training and
instructions.
• Co-operating with any investigation designed to improve health
and safety.
• Setting a personal example when visiting the workplace or sites

a. Risk policy. An effective policy should provide clear outlines of
where a company and its people stand in relation to a policy area.
It should be widely communicated and understood by all. It starts
out with a ‘statement of intent’. This sets out that Portakabin aims
to achieve ‘the prevention of injury and ill health and the promotion
of the health and well-being of all employees’.
Other aspects of the policy are:
• To achieve continuous improvement of standards by annually
reviewing policies, procedures and safe systems of working
and setting clear objectives and targets.
• For all employees to take ownership of health and safety. This
should be their first consideration in everything they do.
• Having an ‘open door’ policy to reporting health and safety
issues and concerns.
• Encouraging reporting of accident, incident and near-misses.

by abiding by local rules and wearing appropriate protective
equipment.

b. Risk identification. Companies assess all health and safety

• Promoting the company’s commitment to H&S at all levels.

risks which are documented as part of a wider risk register. Safety

• Knowing emergency procedures at the location where working.

procedures are then put in place to reduce or limit these risks. The
risk register and safety procedures are continually updated.

Appropriate training is given depending on the individual person’s
role. For example, a director will have training in legal duties and
responsibilities; an operative will have training specific to the role
for example, manual handling training. Portakabin employs fulltime H&S professionals who are qualified at degree or diploma
level specifically in health and safety.

Implementing health and safety
Implementation means putting something into practice. Portakabin
has a commitment to health and safety which goes beyond simply
meeting minimal legal requirements. This is demonstrated through the
achievement of the OHSAS 18001 Standard.
70

www.thetimes100.co.uk

PORTAKABIN STUDY

2/10/12

14:13

Page 5

www.portakabin.co.uk

c. Training. H&S training for new employees is initially carried out
during an induction programme. This covers all company
procedures that directly affect the new employee and establishes
a strong health and safety awareness.
Existing employees regularly receive update training. This includes
training where:
• there are modifications to new or existing machinery
and equipment
• an employee changes job role or position
• people are working with hazardous substances. This is
referred to as COSHH (Control of Substances Hazardous to
Health) training.

Accidents caused by injury at work potentially create substantial
losses to a business and are de-motivating to the workforce. In
the UK injuries that cause an employee to be away from work for
more than seven days must be reported online to the Health and
Safety Executive (a government H&S body) within 15 days. This

Employees also receive training in handling materials and
equipment (set out in Manual Handling Regulations).

requirement is set out under the Reporting of Injuries, Diseases
and Dangerous Occurrences Regulations (RIDDOR). The accident
incident rate for Portakabin under RIDDOR is 37.7% less than the

d. Measuring and monitoring. Portakabin regularly carries out
checks to make sure that its health and safety practice is
continually improving. It has a number of measures in place to
record its health and safety performance. These include the
analysis of accident reports. The company has an ‘aim for zero’
approach to accidents. Another key indicator is the number of
working days lost. Figures for accidents and working days lost

average in the construction industry.
Portakabin demonstrates its commitment to improving health and
safety in its recently launched ‘Aim for Zero’ campaign. This focuses
on the behaviours required to achieve zero incidents and accidents.

Conclusion

due to accidents are constantly monitored. This makes sure that

Health and safety delivers many business benefits to Portakabin.

the company is alert to negative trends and patterns. These are

As a family company the heart of the Portakabin business lies in a

immediately investigated.

motivated group of employees working together to build strong
communities. Focus on H&S by the company and its employees

Business benefits of
health and safety focus

demonstrates a shared commitment to each other. This positively

Careful attention to health and safety adds value to a company

The central aim of a commercial business is to produce valued

and its products. Having a strong health and safety record

products at a profit. Portakabin is able to concentrate on

enhances brand image. It also means that the company is able to

producing its high quality modular buildings, knowing that it has

deliver the right products at the right time with the minimum of

effective risk management in place. A strong focus on health and

delay and safely. This is vital in the highly competitive construction

safety not only enhances customer satisfaction and loyalty but

industry. The overall impact of these benefits is to make

also strengthens the image of the brand.

affects relationships with customers and other stakeholders.

Portakabin a supplier of choice because it provides the company
with a competitive edge over rivals.

schools. They seek to work with suppliers who have the same
concerns for health and safety as they do. Portakabin has
therefore been able to build very strong relationships with regular
customers. The esteem in which the company is held by
customers impacts positively on employee motivation. For the
company the strong health and safety record substantially reduces
downtime (i.e. time lost to inactivity) and associated costs and

safety benefits a business. (2 marks)
2. Explain how health and safety legislation affects a
company and its employees. (4 marks)
3. Analyse three ways of implementing health and safety
at Portakabin and explain why they are important.
(6 marks)
4. Evaluate the business benefits that Portakabin

Exam-style questions

Portakabin customers include businesses, health authorities and

1. Describe how having a positive approach to health and

achieves from its clear focus on health and safety.
(8 marks)

creates a safe culture.

Portakabin | Adding value through health and safety

71

NEW PRIMARK

29/8/12

10:32

Page 2

ENVIRONMENT

Beyond corporate social responsibility

Primark has initiated a programme of activities which supports its

Introduction

corporate social responsibility (CSR) stance and ensures that its
Primark is a subsidiary company of the ABF (Associated British

trading meets the company’s values and ethical standards.

Foods) Group. The company was launched in 1969 in Ireland trading

Underpinning its programme of activities is Primark’s Code of

as Penny's. By 2000, there were over 100 stores across Britain and

Conduct which ensures that all workers making its products are

Ireland. By 2012 Primark had 238 branches across the UK, Ireland

treated decently, paid a fair wage and work in good working

and Europe. Primark has become distinctive for offering unbeatable

conditions. For more information please visit

value while never losing its innovative, fashion-driven edge.

www.primark-ethicaltrade.co.uk

Like many retail fashion businesses, Primark does not manufacture

This case study looks at Primark’s involvement in the HERproject

goods itself. Its expertise lies in understanding its customers and

(Health Enables Returns) which is raising awareness and delivering

working with its suppliers to produce goods to Primark’s

healthcare education to female workers in supplier countries.

specification. It then gets the right goods to the right places at the
right prices. Its profitability depends on sheer volume of sales.

What is CSR?

Primark's value-for-money prices rely on low costs. These are
achieved in part through economies of scale and efficient distribution.

Businesses need to acknowledge and respond to factors in their
environment, for example, changes in available workforce or the

Primark’s products are mainly sourced from suppliers in Europe

business’ impact on its local communities. Corporate social

and Asia. Its key sourcing countries are China, India, Bangladesh

responsibility represents the responsibility that a business has

and Turkey. Putting the manufacturing of garments into these

towards all its stakeholders, not just to owners or shareholders,

countries creates jobs. These are often at better rates of pay than

to deal with their needs fairly.

other types of work on offer, improving overall standards of living.
Internal stakeholders include shareholders and employees.
Shareholders want a return on their capital and this depends
on making a profit. That in turn means by adding value.
Employees want job security, good pay and conditions and job
satisfaction. External stakeholders include customers, suppliers,
non-governmental organisations, workers and the local
communities where products are made. All of these have
different needs.
An organisation therefore needs to be able to respond and
demonstrate responsibility in different ways. This might include
activities as wide-ranging as encouraging employees to volunteer in
community projects; sponsoring and supporting charity work; or
contributing time and money to improving its environmental impact.

72

Curriculum topics covered: • Corporate social responsibility • Business ethics
• Stakeholders • Supply chain

NEW PRIMARK

29/8/12

10:32

Page 3

also to give them the tools to help them take charge of their
personal and working lives. These benefits in turn pass on to their
families and help to enhance whole communities.

Making CSR happen
The HERproject is an initiative started by BSR (Business for Social
Responsibility), a non-governmental organisation that works with
over 250 companies on environmental, social and human rights.
The HERproject has so far helped over 50,000 women in different
countries. It has done this through working with companies like

Why Primark embraces CSR

Primark, Primark’s suppliers and local health providers.

As an international business with a global supply chain and a

The HERproject is simple but surprisingly powerful:

growing retail base, Primark believes that business has a

• A small number of female staff in a factory (around 10%) is

responsibility to act and trade ethically and that, by doing so, it
can be a force for good. Its business directly contributes to the
employment of more than 700,000 workers across three

selected to become health education trainers called ‘peer
group educators’.
• The local health service provider trains the peer group

continents. Ensuring that their rights are respected is key to its

educators, who are then responsible for training the other

continued growth.

women based in the workplace, passing on the message and
helping to disseminate what they have learned.

Primark does not own the companies or factories that produce its
goods, but it does have a responsibility to the workers in those

The process emphasises mutual help and encouragement. The

factories, to its customers and shareholders, to ensure that its

women trainers are effective because they fully understand the

products are made in good working conditions. The HERproject in

local culture. They are not seen as outsiders imposing strange

Bangladesh is an example of how Primark is actively seeking to

ideas. Instead, the trainers understand why the women may be

make positive changes in the lives of its supplier workforces.

reluctant to seek help with issues that can be sensitive. They can
build their self-confidence as well as their practical knowledge.

In Bangladesh, over 50% of the manufacturing workforce is made
up of women. The jobs available to women in garment factories
give them greater independence and help to reduce poverty.

‘I didn’t have anyone to tell me how to look after myself, it

However, these women often have little education and low levels

wasn’t taught at school. The trainers told me that many

of literacy as they drop out of education early to help their families.

diseases come from the unpurified water that I was taking
from the tap. This water can be the cause of sickness,

They also lack basic knowledge of health, hygiene and nutrition

cholera and diarrhoea. At first my family said to me, how do

and an understanding of how a woman’s body works. Poor

you know this stuff? You work in a garments factory! I told

hygiene often causes persistent and painful infections. Childbirth is

them it’s what I have learnt from the HERproject. When I

particularly hazardous and post-birth complications are common.

began to give them advice they started to get interested in

There is little understanding of the symptoms of sexually

the project. Everyone I have told now boils their water and

transmitted diseases (including HIV) or the means of preventing

they don’t suffer like before.’

transmission. Far more women than men are malnourished and

Umme Habiba (garment worker)

many women suffer from anaemia. These issues, often combined
with a lack of access to qualified medical advice, mean that the
female workforce is particularly vulnerable.

The HERproject is also helping others not directly involved in the
project. Outside the workshops informal learning continues.

The HERproject uses education as the key tool against all these

Women build supportive relationships and talk to each other out of

interrelated problems. The programme aims not only to improve

work. This is reinforced by the project helping to set up factory

the health of female workers through training and education, but

clinics and creating vital referral links to local hospitals.

www.thetimes100.co.uk

73

NEW PRIMARK

2/10/12

14:14

Page 4

Mrs Kaniz Fatema is the managing director of a medium-sized
factory in Dhaka, Bangladesh. When the HERproject was
introduced to her factory a year ago, she was unconvinced,
viewing it as ‘just another project’. However, just one year later her
view has been transformed. Women's health is now high on her
agenda. A healthier workforce is literally paying dividends.
Absenteeism and labour turnover are down by a startling 50%.
Productivity is up and even internal staff communication is more
effective. Mrs Kaniz Fatema now employs a female doctor and has
set up a scheme to provide sanitary napkins to her female
workers, helping to embed a new culture within the factory and
allowing health education in the factory to continue after the
project ends.

‘HERproject has made a real difference in my factory. The
workers have increased their productivity as they are now
looking after themselves better. I have become a lot closer
to my female workers. I have also told other factory
Selina Kamal is a factory quality inspector and a peer educator for
HERproject. Through her own training she is now more aware of
the importance of cleanliness for herself and her children. They all
now drink purified water and eat more vegetables. She has

managers about the success of the project at our factory.
The male workers are now asking when we will start a
similar project for them.’
Mrs Kaniz Fatema (factory manager)

already helped a friend, Shilpi, who is a school teacher.

‘I came to Selina after I had two miscarriages and irregular

Other benefits are harder to measure but are increasingly recognised

periods. Selina advised me to go the doctor as she knew

by the factory managers. Getting women to communicate effectively

something must be wrong. The doctor prescribed me

on health matters builds trust and confidence. This feeds back into

medication for my problem.’

better communication with supervisors and managers. This, in turn,

Shilpi (teacher)

leads to improved teamwork and the motivation to accept more
responsibility and leadership roles in the community.

The value of the HERproject
Improving the health of women workers in Bangladesh and

‘Workers now stay longer and are more productive. The

helping to empower and educate the female workforce is an

HERproject has also helped my relationship with the women

important ethical goal in its own right. The benefits to communities

workers. They are not so shy to talk to me anymore. If there

can also be seen. Over time, initiatives like this can support key

are problems, I now hear about them.’

issues such as reducing infant mortality.

Mr Riaz (factory manager)

Factories in Bangladesh taking part in HERprojects have seen
healthy returns on the money invested by Primark in the
programme. This has been achieved through improvements in
productivity, a more stable workforce, lower absenteeism,
decreased labour turnover, improved quality and a reduction in
housekeeping costs. As an example, the managing director of one
factory in Bangladesh found that absenteeism in the factory fell by
55% during the first six months of the HERproject. Turnover of
female workers dropped from over 50% to around 12%.
74

www.thetimes100.co.uk

NEW PRIMARK

29/8/12

10:32

Page 5

www.primark.co.uk

Some trade-offs between stakeholder needs are inevitable. CSR
does not come free. It involves a real commitment of resources,
management time and energy. On the other hand, as studies of
the HERproject in other countries have shown, each dollar
invested in the health of female employees can yield more than
three dollars in business benefits. In addition, the improvements in
human well-being are incomparable.
Despite criticism of globalisation, business and trade can be a
force for good. This is increasingly recognised in the ways that
consumers assign values to brands. Primark is making progress in
taking on wider responsibilities and devising relevant projects that
work on the ground. It has done this with help from NGOs and
This demonstrates the principles of the Hawthorne effect theory of

organisations such as BSR. Its approach with the HERproject is

motivation. Theorist Elton Mayo found that factory workers with

not purely about business benefits, but focused on making a

long hours of routine work were motivated by someone taking an

difference to the lives of its supplier workers.

interest in them and their work. Feeling that they mattered as
individuals, they experienced a new connection with the job. As a

To date, 4,500 women in Primark’s factories have been trained

result, productivity improved. In a similar way, by focusing on the

under the HERproject in Bangladesh. The project results have

women workers and their health issues, the HERproject is also

shown such benefit that the project is being rolled out to Primark’s

delivering improved motivation. See the HERproject video at

suppliers in China and India. Primark’s ongoing involvement with the

http://www.primark-ethicaltrading.co.uk/ourwork/c/womens_health

women workers in Bangladesh and other supplier countries will help
to provide it with a sustainable and ethical business model.

‘Not only has HERproject given women the knowledge to
improve their health behaviour, it has empowered them to
seek leadership roles in their jobs and their communities.
The peer-to-peer model – with women teaching each other
about women’s health – has given them the confidence to
go against the grain in regions where the traditional role for
women is not as strong.’
Racheal Yeager (BSR HERproject Manager)

Conclusion
The industrialised countries of the world benefit from the lower
costs of labour in countries such as Bangladesh and India.
1. Describe what is meant by CSR. (2 marks)

questioning its sustainability.

2. Explain the basis for a company undertaking CSR
activities. (4 marks)
3. Analyse why the HERproject has been a business
success, over and above improving the well-being of
the workforce. (6 marks)
4. Evaluate to what extent you think Primark has been
able to reconcile the interests of its shareholders and

Exam-style questions

However, more consumers are now asking if this is ethical and

those of the employees of its suppliers. (8 marks)

Primark | Beyond corporate social responsibility

75

Sheffield Forgemasters

29/8/12

10:33

Page 2

PEOPLE

Apprenticeship training within the steel industry

The scheme has an excellent reputation. It received the Large

Introduction

Employer of the Year award at the 2011 National Apprenticeship
Sheffield Forgemasters International Ltd (SFIL) is a steel producer

Awards. SFIL also features as one of the top 100 apprenticeship

and engineering company. Based in South Yorkshire, the heartland

employers in the UK.

of traditional steel production, the company has six subsidiaries,
including operations in America and Europe. It is one of the

It is proving attractive for many young people. As Dan, a 20-year-

biggest private sector employers in the area. The company

old apprentice, states:

manufactures bespoke heavy steel castings and forgings. SFIL
specialises in providing high quality total engineering packages for
its customers. It supplies businesses in many industrial sectors,

‘I chose this scheme because SFIL has a really good

with customers in the defence, nuclear, oil and gas exploration,

reputation in my local area and I knew this could lead to a

power generation, marine and construction industries.

job for life.’

Engineering is a highly skilled and specialised profession so SFIL
needs well-trained employees. SFIL offers employees industry-

This case study looks in more detail at SFIL’s apprenticeship

leading training courses that are tailored to its own needs. It has

programme. It draws on the experiences of three current

been running a highly acclaimed apprenticeship programme since

apprentices: Dan, Kurt and Rebecca. It also considers the broader

2005. The company invests £1 million a year into this programme.

training challenge for a modern engineering business such as SFIL.

It allows the company to supply its next generation of skilled
workers, trained to its own high standards. Apprentices will form
the future backbone of the business. Some apprentices have
progressed to supervisory and managerial positions. As Graham
Honeyman, SFIL’s chief executive, explains:

‘Our commitment to apprenticeships is evidenced by them
gaining permanent positions and rewarding salaries from
day one.’

Applicants to the programme are usually aged between 16 and 24
years old. This allows SFIL to train young people in the
‘Forgemasters Way’ and to benefit from government funding.
Apprentices are trained in all areas of the business. They do a
variety of jobs during their apprenticeship and experience the
many roles needed in steel-making and heavy engineering.

76

Curriculum topics covered: • Workforce planning • Training
• Training in action • Benefits of training

Sheffield Forgemasters

29/8/12

10:33

Page 3

Workforce planning
Workforce planning is the process of establishing and meeting a
company’s labour needs. It needs to take into account the skills as
well as the overall number of employees required to conduct the
business. It has to consider anticipated future demand as well as
current needs. SFIL faces many of the same workforce planning
issues as other businesses. It needs to provide staff development,
to respond to changes in its external environment and to remain
ahead of the competition. SFIL also faces additional challenges due
to the highly skilled and specialist nature of its work.
SFIL’s workforce planning has to take into account many factors.
For example, it needs to understand the local labour market.

candidates are interviewed. This is producing results. According to

Skilled workers may move in or out of the area. It needs to

the local college, the 2011 apprenticeship cohort was the best

consider the wider economy. A global economic downturn may

intake so far. Dan, who started in 2010, explains the process:

reduce demand for its products. Within this ever-changing
context, SFIL needs to plan the number of workers it will need in
the future. It must assess the skills that these workers will need.

‘I started my apprenticeship after going through firstly a

By forecasting these future needs of the business, it can produce

group interview, where everyone was really friendly, and

a plan to ensure that it will have trained staff that can deliver what

then an individual one.’

its customers want.
SFIL strives to be the best at what it does. To achieve this, the

SFIL is currently training 64 apprentices. This is just under 8% of the

focus of its operations is on quality. It believes in continuous

total workforce. This underscores SFIL’s commitment to training the

improvement and being a leader through innovation in developing

next generation. It will help the company ensure that it has highly

new products and processes. So to succeed, it needs a strong

skilled workers to meet the needs of the business in the future.

skills base. As these are vital features of SFIL’s current and future
growth, they must also be built into training programmes. This

The apprenticeship programme has helped SFIL to improve its

focus on quality is a feature of the apprenticeship programme.

skills base. This is vital as it increases the company’s capacity to

Kurt, a 21-year-old apprentice, says:

handle new and complex projects. Graham Honeyman says:

‘I completed a level 2 foundation course in engineering to

‘Apprentices have contributed to the organisation's

give me basic skills. I now work in the furnaces, calibrating

success for many years. They are now engaged in refining

the temperature to very strict standards. This heat

work practices and control systems to improve efficiency

treatment phase is a vital part of the manufacturing

and productivity across the operation.’

process and the slightest change in temperature can affect
the hardness of the metal. We supply materials to lots of
different industries, including the nuclear industry, so our
materials must meet the highest quality and safety
standards – there is no margin for error.’

Another way that SFIL drives up quality is by taking on only the
best people as apprentices. In 2010 there were more than 250
applicants for just 30 apprenticeships. SFIL undertakes a prerecruitment screening exercise to make sure only the best
www.thetimes100.co.uk

77

Sheffield Forgemasters

29/8/12

10:33

Page 4

Rebecca, a 23-year-old business and administration apprentice,
is supported by other models of training:

‘I undertake formal training for my NVQ and I get to apply
what I learn in the workplace. My training takes place
mostly on site. I receive project work set by my tutor,
which I complete and have assessed by email. The tutor
visits on a regular basis to carry out appraisals of my
work. I’ve also been on in-house training courses for
things like Microsoft Word and Excel. I have taken a “train
the trainer” course to learn how to run training
programmes for the company’s own instructors. So I’ve
acquired lots of new skills.’

There are several qualifications that apprentices can take
depending on their level of education and the job for which they
are training. These range from BTEC, City and Guilds and NVQ
awards all the way up to doctorate-level degrees.

The importance of training
Training is the process of acquiring knowledge and skills. It
ensures that workers are better able to perform their jobs. The
objectives of training include:
• increasing productivity by introducing more effective ways of
working
• educating employees in the use of new equipment and new
methods
• making employees more adaptable by providing them with the

Training in action
Apprenticeships are designed to provide the foundation for
undertaking key roles within many of the company’s divisions.
They equip successful school and college leavers with skilled
trades. Dan, Kurt and Rebecca work in different parts of the
business, but have all been shortlisted for the prestigious Cutlers
Award. These awards encourage apprentices to expand their
knowledge of industry through travel and reading.

skills to carry out a variety of tasks
• increasing job satisfaction and producing a motivated
workforce.

Each apprentice is developing different skills, showing the variety
of approaches that SFIL provides on its apprenticeships.
Apprentices come from a variety of backgrounds with varied

Apprentices at SFIL benefit from both on-the-job and off-the-job

qualifications. Dan says:

training. On-the-job training takes place at SFIL’s premises.
Trainees receive support and instruction as they carry out their
allocated job roles. Off-the-job training takes place at a college or

‘I left school with A-levels in Business Studies, General

another learning centre. Dan spends one day a week at college

Studies and PE, so not exactly engineering-related

studying the theory of metallurgy. During the four days of the

subjects, but SFIL has helped me to build up the right

week he is working, he puts this theory into practice. He has, for

skills. I am now on a BTEC level 3 in Materials

example, been trained to use ultrasonics to scan for cracks in the

Engineering, which can eventually lead to a full degree.’

metals and he has now qualified to work on this unsupervised.
Kurt’s off-the-job training includes a BTEC level 3 course in
manufacturing engineering at a nearby college. This training

Dan enjoys the ‘family’ atmosphere at SFIL. Many SFIL

supports his role working in the furnaces calibrating the

employees have been with the company for years. This means

temperature of the process. Dan and Kurt’s roles are highly skilled

that he can consult colleagues with plenty of experience as he is

and are vital to ensure SFIL’s high quality standards.

working with some of the best people in the industry.

78

www.thetimes100.co.uk

Sheffield Forgemasters

29/8/12

10:33

Page 5

www.sheffieldforgemasters.com

Rebecca has a different background. She says:

By increasing the skills and knowledge base of apprentices, SFIL is
able to handle increasingly complex projects, resulting in stronger
order books. Apprentice experiences are varied, but all help to build

‘Being honest, I didn’t do as well in my GCSEs at school as

a stronger business. Dan, for example, can now be entrusted with

I had wanted. I did beauty therapy at college and worked for

really important aspects of SFIL work, looking for cracks in the

a time in a beauty salon and then after that in a call centre

metal. If any are found, he is part of the team identifying how to

but neither gave me the sort of job satisfaction I wanted. I

correct the problem. This is a really important aspect of SFIL’s work.

joined SFIL on an apprenticeship in business and

It involves working with equipment and materials that cost millions

administration. This might seem different from the traditional

of pounds and are used in critical sectors like the nuclear industry.

view of an apprenticeship in an industrial area but it works in

Products need to be of the highest quality to meet the customers’

a similar way. I work in the engineering forge performing a

standards and to ensure operational safety.

variety of different roles, such as purchasing, as well being
the PA to the managing director, which involves setting

Conclusion

meetings, managing spreadsheets and reports.’
Sheffield Forgemasters seeks a competitive advantage through
being the best and through innovation to improve its products and
In the longer term, each apprentice will aim to gain further
qualifications and secure their future at SFIL. Each will be able to
carve out a career path that suits them and the business. Kurt is
planning to take a foundation degree to increase his theoretical
knowledge and experience. Rebecca can see herself moving into a
purchasing manager role or even into sales or accounts. The open

processes. The development of its apprentices is an important
means of achieving these goals. Through the scheme, it is able to
develop people who will form the backbone of the company in the
future. They are being equipped with required skills, as identified
during workforce planning. Both male and female apprentices are
offered the support they need to succeed. Rebecca says:

policy at SFIL means apprentices have many different opportunities.

The benefits of training

‘Being female in a traditionally male environment is great –
I love working with engineers.’

As well as benefiting the apprentices, the apprenticeship
programme generates clear business benefits. As well as
addressing serious skills challenges, it also helps to:
• increase productivity
• reduce staff turnover
• create loyal employees
• produce efficiency gains.

The company continues to invest £1 million a year in its
apprenticeship training programme. Apprentices are offered a wide
range of progression routes, tailored to both their needs and the
needs of the business. Many apprentices progress to obtain
further qualifications and develop long-term careers in the highest
levels in the organisation.

1. Describe two ways in which SFIL gains by starting
apprentices at a young age. (2 marks)
difference between ‘on-the-job’ and ‘off-the-job’
training. (4 marks)
3. Analyse the statement by chief executive Graham
Honeyman. What do you think he considers to be the
key benefits of apprenticeships? (6 marks)
4. Evaluate the different training programmes described.

Exam-style questions

2. Using examples from the case study, explain the

What do you think makes each effective? Give reasons
for your answer. (8 marks)

Sheffield Forgemasters International Ltd | Apprenticeship training within the steel industry

79

SYNGENTA STUDY

29/8/12

10:33

Page 2

S T R AT E G Y

Values into vision

Introduction

Mission and vision

In 2011 the world's population reached 7 billion, compared to just

A business organisation needs a mission or purpose to create a

3.5 billion in 1969. Current estimates suggest that it will reach

sense of direction and effectively allocate resources and make

9 billion by 2050. To feed these extra people and to meet the

decisions. This is conveyed by its aims which express how it adds

demand of increasingly affluent and urban populations, world food

value. Aims help direct resources to the needs of profitable

production will need to approximately double over the coming

markets. They point the way towards the business’ objectives

25 years. Meanwhile there are up to two billion people lacking

and strategy.

food security.
Corporate objectives

To make matters worse the effects of global warming, more
frequent floods and droughts and changes in temperature could
have a negative impact on food production. Whether used for
feeding humans or animals, it is plants growing in fields which

Determining

Supporting

provide the majority of our food supply.
Syngenta is a company focused on researching and developing
crops. In particular, it adds value though the application of plant

Functional objectives
Marketing/Operations/Human resources/Finance

science to seeds and crop protection. Operating globally in
90 countries, with over 26,000 employees, it has major facilities in

Aims are only useful if they trigger action. This is why many

the UK, France, Germany, Switzerland, the USA and India.

companies concentrate their aims into a single memorable
purpose. Syngenta's purpose is ‘Bringing plant potential to life’.

The company was formed in 2000 by combining the agri-business

This is designed to energise and inspire the Syngenta community

divisions of Zeneca and Novartis. Its UK origins date back to the

which includes all the company's stakeholders – its employees,

1920s when ICI started agricultural research and the production of

customers, shareholders, creditors and suppliers.

farm chemicals.
This shared sense of purpose provides the basis for the
In 2011 the company’s sales were a record-breaking $13,264

organisation’s key objectives. These are the 'destinations', the major

million (approx. £8,550 million). This provided rewards for

goals that the business intends to fulfil. In a large organisation they

shareholders and funds continued world-class research for the

are broken down into supporting functional objectives. Properly

future. The company's research and development (R&D) spending

co-ordinated, these functional objectives should enable the

is $1,000 million (approx. £650 million) each year. This has led to a

organisation’s corporate objectives to be achieved.

stream of innovative products with which growers can improve
their crop yields. Syngenta, through the expertise of its research

Like many major companies, Syngenta condenses its objectives into

and development team, is a world leader in producing seeds. Its

a vision. This is a short statement that paints a picture of where the

work is unique in meeting the global challenge of feeding the ever-

company wants to be in the future. It is designed to co-ordinate and

increasing population from limited resources.

motivate employees to work towards a common goal.

80

Curriculum topics covered: • Mission • Vision • Values • Strategies

SYNGENTA STUDY

29/8/12

10:33

Page 3

Innovation

Performance
Values
Health

Intensity

Most sugar (70%) is obtained from sugar cane and Brazil is the
dominant producer. While world demand for sugar is rapidly rising

Innovation is the engine that drives Syngenta's success. Ongoing

– up by 45% in 20 years – the industry has modernised little and

innovations add value for customers and give competitive

is largely unmechanised. Syngenta’s vision was to improve the

advantage as competitors find them difficult to copy.

production and planting of sugar cane in order to reduce costs
and increase productivity in an ecologically sustainable way.

This requires the Syngenta development teams to take nothing
for granted but constantly ask questions, breed creativity and

Syngenta’s product Plene is an example of how Syngenta puts

seize opportunities.

that vision into practice. In Plene, Syngenta has designed a fully
integrated system for sugar cane production. This has resulted in

Intensity means passion, energy and commitment to success,

a 15% reduction in grower costs, better working conditions for

always with customers in mind. It is a shift of mindset from 'doing

labourers and reduced soil erosion.

a job' to 'starring in a role'. Syngenta employees use initiative to
build teams and develop partnerships.

A range of project teams worked on the realisation of this project.
High quality, disease-free seedlings were selected at Syngenta's

Health is a large idea based around vitality and well-being. It

nurseries. These are processed and treated with Syngenta

embraces people, the natural environment and the eco-systems of

technologies. Planting has been mechanised through a

which they are part. The health value affirms growth and

partnership with John Deere, the agricultural machinery

development as it celebrates knowledge and ideas.

manufacturers. This has reduced labour input and increased
productivity. The results are a faster germination, greater

Performance is about achievement and quality. Syngenta must

resistance to disease and a more productive harvest.

add value for all of its stakeholders. It seeks profitability by
investing in people and research. Effective performance is

Values

achieved through an insistence on high standards of safety and
ethics and a determination to uphold all Syngenta’s values.

Every individual has his or her own values – those beliefs that they
hold to be most important and which guide their behaviour. This
might include always being truthful or understanding what is right
or wrong.
An organisation’s values demonstrate what the organisation
stands for and help to create a set of shared behaviours which
distinguish the company from others. Syngenta's values deeply
influence everything that the company does. Significantly, its
purpose and values not only express its ability to add commercial
value but also reflect its beliefs as a human-focused organisation.
Syngenta’s values include four key aspects: innovation, intensity,
health and performance.
www.thetimes100.co.uk

81

SYNGENTA STUDY

29/8/12

10:33

Page 4

The business’ work on developing seeds demonstrates these

companies that had different identities and therefore cultures.

values. Seeds are never standard. Each variety differs in the quality

Syngenta has been working hard to reinforce its chosen core values

of its crop, its resistance to disease and its suitability for different

and make them central to its culture. The theorist Charles Handy

soils and climates. For example, sunflower seeds are a major

identified four main types of culture.

source of vegetable oils used in cooking and food processing.
Syngenta has built a portfolio of seeds to meet each significant
market and grower need. For instance, it worked with a Spanish
vegetable oil producer to develop a seed that yielded healthier oil
that is high in unsaturated fats (which are healthier than saturated
fats). With high yields and effective disease resistance, Syngenta
seeds are now market leaders in many countries.

Handy's culture types (1978):
Power culture - where power is concentrated in a leader
or top management team. Quite informal and flexible, it
allows trusted staff to get on with the job.
Role culture - where authority is arranged in a hierarchy
and power depends on formal status. Many rules and
procedures can make change difficult. Most often seen in
large bureaucratic organisations.
Task culture - is purpose- and project-driven with
leadership based on expertise for the task in hand. Often
copes well with rapid change but may lack overall cohesion.
Person culture - stresses the individual's right to make
decisions with shared rules only for mutual benefit.
Effective for professionals and independent workers such
as lawyers but may break up as conditions change.

To demonstrate Syngenta’s belief in its people, it has a scheme
called the Syngenta Awards. These recognise and celebrate the
company's values in action. All staff are actively encouraged to put

How values drive culture

forward relevant stories concerning how they achieved success in
a project. Not only are those involved in these stories rewarded at

A company’s values give everything it does relative importance.

a ceremony but they are also shared across the company as a

For example, one company may be driven by costs. Saving

source of ideas and inspiration. It is culture in the making.

money becomes the first consideration when decisions need to be
made. Another company may focus on building its reputation.

For example, Humphrey Kiruaye, a trained agricultural advisor, is a

Delighting the customer is then the job of everyone.

Syngenta sales manager in Kenya. As well as marketing improved
seeds and crop protection products, he helps local farmers adopt

These are different values and over time they create different

best practice for yields and safety. He helped a farmer build a

business cultures. Culture can be summed up by the phrase 'the

water storage pond for irrigation and showed him how to reduce

way things are done here.' Culture shows itself in different patterns

the amount of water he used without affecting his healthy crops.

of behaviour and different ways of responding to the various

The farm became a teaching centre for local growers and now

stakeholder groups. Behaviours that influence the organisation’s

includes chemical storage and disposal systems, beehives for

culture may seem trivial but are highly symbolic. Does the company

better pollination and fish in the storage pond.

encourage its people to talk to each other, to share ideas and find
solutions? Does it recognise and reward good ideas and
achievement? Is it aiming to reduce travel costs by using
teleconferencing and internet meetings? Is re-cycling a priority?
Answers to questions like these can indicate whether it believes in
true equality or encourages its people to ‘think outside the box’.
Cultures take time to make but once established they are
surprisingly powerful and resilient. This has special importance at
Syngenta as the business was formed in 2000 from earlier
82

www.thetimes100.co.uk

SYNGENTA STUDY

29/8/12

10:33

Page 5

www.syngenta.com

The Tegra cycle begins when farmers place orders with retailers for
quality treated seeds. The seeds are set to grow using Syngenta
treatments in seedling trays by nursery franchisees. The seedlings
are then passed to transplant franchisees. This type of business
uses mechanised equipment to offer final growers seedlings-inthe-field. Finally the rice plants are grown in a carefully
controlled regime before harvesting and transport to market. This
process ensures that each plant has the optimum chance of
healthy growth.

Conclusion
Strategies

Syngenta is a creative organisation which combines its resources

A strategy answers the question: how shall we do it? It is an

to many parts of the world. This process brings benefits to

integrated plan that emphasises the chosen route towards one or

Syngenta's customers who enjoy best value for money in the

more objectives. Usually a business will have one central strategy

products that they buy. It also brings benefit to Syngenta's

that is focused on its overriding objective. This is broken down

shareholders who earn attractive rewards for their investment.

of technology, innovation and people skills to provide added value

into separate but linked strategies for each of the main business
functions – marketing, operations, human resources and finance.

Syngenta’s world-leading position stems from the knowledge and

Within each of these areas, additional, more detailed plans help to

innovative research that makes it distinctive. Capturing this know-

set out the paths and actions that make the strategy come to life.

how to deliver products that are outstanding in meeting growers'
needs is the key challenge for Syngenta.

Syngenta’s strategy puts the farmer at the centre of everything it
does and is expressed as ‘integrate, innovate and outperform’.

However, it is also important that Syngenta's values are delivered

Integrated offerings of seeds, seed care and crop protection

through the product. Those values are critical to its big strategic

products are customised to the needs of the grower. Innovation

question: 'How do we increase yields without compromising

through Research and Development (R&D) in plant science

environmental sustainability?' They equally apply to many smaller

delivers a stream of products with patent protection. Thinking like

local questions such as: 'How do we help this small grower

growers and the challenges they face will give Syngenta a

increase yields yet keep within budget?’

competitive advantage, so that it outperforms for the benefit of
growers and shareholders alike.

This is where Syngenta’s values really matter and become the
foundations of its brand integrity. They are the hidden ingredient in

For example, the cultivation of rice offers a strategic challenge. 90%

its products and are the starting point for the global achievements

of the world's rice is produced in Asia, where it is an essential daily

of thousands of employees and growers.

food for at least two billion people. Most of the crop is produced on
smallholdings. The majority of its 200 million growers use traditional,
labour-intensive methods, which is a challenge in the face of
increasing labour shortages. Syngenta therefore sought to answer
yields be improved? How could labour intensity be reduced and
food security improved? How could these goals be achieved

(2 marks)
2. Explain how Syngenta's values contribute to its
success. (4 marks)
3. ‘Culture does not appear on the balance sheet yet it is

without endangering longer-term sustainability? The Syngenta

an organisation’s greatest asset’. How far might this be

product Tegra provided many of the answers.

true at Syngenta?(6 marks)
4. Syngenta's strategy relies on managers working

Tegra is an integrated solution that applies technological and

together whilst maintaining a departmental focus.

business innovation to each stage of the production process. Its

Evaluate the extent to which teamwork is essential for

target market is rice farmers in the better irrigated lowlands across

meeting stakeholder needs. (8 marks)

Exam-style questions

the following questions: How, at proportionally lower costs, could

1. Describe the difference between aims and objectives.

Asia where relatively plentiful water allows greater yields.
Syngenta | Values into vision

83

TESCO STUDY

29/8/12

10:34

Page 2

PEOPLE

Using diversity and inclusion to provide better service

Introduction

Tesco works in a competitive market where products, stores,
tastes and even the way customers shop are constantly changing.

Tesco is the UK’s leading retailer, serving millions of customers

Tesco needs to be proactive in preparing to face these changes.

every day. It also employs more people than any other company,

This means finding talented people who will be ambassadors for

with over 300,000 employees in the UK. With almost 3,000 stores,

the brand in the communities it serves. Diverse communities mean

Tesco has a presence in every major town and generated revenues

that it needs to recruit and train people who reflect this diversity,

of over £42 billion in 2011/12. Stores range from the convenient

so that all sections of society are included. This case study looks

town centre Metro and Express formats, to larger Extra stores.

at how Tesco benefits by focusing on diversity and inclusion in its

Tesco provides banking, insurance and telecommunications

employment strategies.

services as well as having a strong online presence.

Diversity and inclusion
Tesco is a business that puts people first, ensuring its customers
and colleagues are at the heart of everything it does.

In the UK we have a diverse society. There are people from many
different backgrounds and cultures. There are also changes taking
place in the number of men and women in the population. These

‘Our core purpose is to create value for customers to earn

changes to population are called ‘demographics’. One key

their lifetime loyalty. Our success depends on people: the

demographic is that an increasing number of older people are

people who shop with us and the people who work

working – an ageing workforce. Tesco’s policy is to ensure that its

with us.’

workforce has a balance of different people. It is keen to search
for talent wherever it lies. At Tesco, ‘Everyone is welcome’. Tesco

Earning customer loyalty is crucial and Tesco focuses on this by

recognises that every person is different and will bring unique

helping customers in lots of small ways which together can make

talents and experiences to a role.

a big difference. ‘Every little helps’ is more than just a slogan. It
describes Tesco’s way of working with all of its stakeholders, and
that includes colleagues as well as customers.

‘Difference can be our strength because talent and diversity
are two sides of the same coin. To focus on one while
ignoring the other is like trying to run a store with no
customers – it just won’t work.'

84

Curriculum topics covered: • Equal opportunities • Diversity
• Inclusion • Benefits of a diversity strategy

TESCO STUDY

2/10/12

14:15

Page 3

Tesco has a particular understanding of what is meant by ‘talent’.
It believes in recognising the strengths of each individual person,
regardless of their background and investing in them to help reach
the goals that they set for themselves – being the best they can
be. There is a constant hunt for talent.

‘Talent is about people and we all have a role in talent
spotting, recruiting, developing, promoting, moving, rewarding
and engaging them’.

Diversity, inclusion and equal opportunities are so central to the
workplace that there are laws to ensure fair treatment. For
example, it is against the law to make unfair choices against
people on grounds of age, race, disability, gender or sexual
orientation. This is called discrimination.
In addition, managers and personnel teams meet regularly to talk
Tesco’s diversity strategy is central to the way it approaches

about who is ready for a move to meet a new challenge or help

recruitment, training and development and is reflected throughout

them develop. This all takes place within a regular annual cycle, so

the objectives of the business. In practice, that means that every

each employee’s objectives and development plans can be

role and every employee at Tesco has a place in something called

regularly reviewed and updated.

the ‘framework for talent’. This framework is used to find and
develop talent for the future and has three parts:
• talent plans for the business
• career plans for individuals
• succession plans for jobs.
All colleagues set objectives and draw up personal plans for
development as part of a regular review process. Every employee
has the same opportunity to discuss his or her performance and
career and is given the opportunity to get on.

Engaging with diverse groups
Tesco has established a number of networks to ensure that it
engages with all its people. Its four key networks are:
• Out at Tesco. This group represents those with different sexual
orientations. It has over 1,000 lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender (LGBT) members and is recognised by other groups
as an excellent example of how such networks should operate.
• Women in Business. This is the longest established network.
There are a number of branches supporting women’s issues,
raising the profile of women in the business and supporting
them to develop their careers through training, mentoring and
career sponsorship.
• Tesco Asian Network. This helps to raise the profile of careers
at Tesco to Asian groups. It holds two events each year where
Asian colleagues are invited to attend to network, share
experiences and visit a ‘careers fair’ about opportunities at
Tesco. It has inspired a series of ‘parents’ evenings’, which
have helped Asian parents to understand the career
opportunities available at Tesco and understand the range of
jobs their children could enjoy in the business.
• ABC Network. This is the most recent network, which builds on
an idea raised at an Asian Network event. Its aim is to make
Tesco the employer of choice for African, Black British and
Caribbean colleagues and to provide training and development
opportunities which will enable more black people to reach
senior positions within the business.

www.thetimes100.co.uk

85

TESCO STUDY

29/8/12

10:34

Page 4

Tesco recognises that within each person there is raw talent, ideas
and energy. It sees that everyone is an individual who is seeking a
good work-life balance and aims to help all employees to be the
best that they can be. It encourages the business to create
challenging, interesting and flexible opportunities to release this
potential at every level of the business, from the shop floor to the
boardroom. By ensuring that the best people are in the right jobs,
Tesco is able to compete in a highly competitive market.
The main strands for Tesco’s diversity strategies are:
‘

‘Everyone is welcome’

‘Raising the bar on talent’

We all have talents; we just

As Tesco sees the unique

need the encouragement to

talents of people, it will have

realise potential.

interesting people in
interesting jobs.

Tesco also has strong links with many organisations representing
disabled people, such as Whizz-Kidz. It also has its own Diversity

Tesco reflects the

It takes risks on talent to

Council. The Council sets the diversity strategy for Tesco. Its goals

communities it serves. It

bring extra skills to the

are to show that Tesco is inclusive, to make everyone welcome and

searches for talent within

business.

to play an active role in the diverse communities it serves. Tesco is

groups that are under-

currently working with disabled colleagues to establish whether

represented.

there is a need for a disability network. The business also works
with a number of diversity partners. These partnerships help Tesco

Tesco values difference. It

All are helped to develop and

to build and improve its diversity strategy. These partners are:

welcomes its benefits for

build new and diverse talent.

• Stonewall. Tesco is a ‘Diversity Champion’ member of

itself and its customers.

Stonewall, a charity which exists to ensure equal rights for
lesbians and gay men in a society where they can be open,

Tesco brings in talent through

By engaging with its people,

honest and safe at home, at school, at work and in

creative channels to find the

Tesco helps them to engage

the community.

best and most diverse

with its customers.

• EFD (Employers Forum on Disability). EFD is currently working

people.

with Tesco to help it to do a better job for disabled colleagues.

Tesco sets clear objectives

It will also help encourage more disabled people to choose

with expectations of both

Tesco as a great place to work.

performance and potential.

• Opportunity Now. This group offers support for gender equality
in business. It is committed to supporting the business to offer
opportunities to both men and women. Its key objective is
equal treatment of genders but, as it is women who are most
often under-represented, this tends to be its focus.

A diversity strategy
The importance that Tesco places on diversity is shown by the
detail of its strategy. The key aspects are that ‘everyone is
welcome’ and the aim is to ‘raise the bar on talent’. Tesco has a
dedicated talent and diversity team. This team communicates the
diversity strategy throughout the business to ensure that its
objectives are reached.
86

www.thetimes100.co.uk

TESCO STUDY

29/8/12

10:34

Page 5

www.tesco.com

Former Tesco Chairman Sir David Reid is chairman of the Trustee
Board at Whizz-Kidz, a charity that supports and empowers
young wheelchair users. Tesco therefore has a strong relationship
with the charity. Whizz-Kidz was chosen as Tesco’s Charity of the
Year in 2006. Research conducted by Whizz-Kidz showed that
many young wheelchair users found it hard to develop adult skills
and outlooks, so the charity provides training to help young
people become more confident and independent.
Tesco is backing a five-year project, launched by Whizz-Kidz and
also supported by the National Lottery, to set up a network of
clubs for young wheelchair users. The ‘Kidz Unlimited’ project
provides a chance for young disabled people to socialise and raise
issues that are important to them. It also provides training, work
skills, advice and access to work placements.

Conclusion
Tesco recognises that the communities it works in are diverse and

Benefits of a diversity strategy
Tesco’s diversity strategy brings many benefits to the business. It
means, for instance, that Tesco is always aiming to recruit from
the widest possible talent pool, helping it find the best person for
the job. The workforce will have a better understanding of
customer needs as it reflects the same diversity as the customer
base. It also opens up new ideas and opportunities that may arise
from different cultures.
Having a mixture of different age groups within the workforce can
also help to raise morale. The mix of young and older people
brings a broad range of knowledge, experience and social skills to
the company. A diverse workforce is more flexible, since it
consists of a wide range of people from all walks of life, all able to
work together to deliver the best service in all circumstances. It
also leads to better performance and lower costs, since

constantly evolving. In addition, each individual has skills and
potential that Tesco can help them to realise. Tesco’s diversity and
inclusion strategy ensures that ‘everyone is welcome’ and that
systems are in place to help people reach their potential. This
strategy helps Tesco find, train and employ the best talent from all
parts of society, particularly groups that may otherwise be underrepresented, for instance, young wheelchair users.
This strategy helps to create a workforce that reflects the same
diversity as is found in society. This means it better reflects Tesco’s
customer base. The business wants to attract and keep the best
people so it works hard to make Tesco a great place to work. By
encouraging employees’ development, Tesco works to ensure all
colleagues – wherever they work – can fulfil their potential. A
strategy that supports its people and is good for customers is
therefore one that is good in helping Tesco to provide better
service in a competitive market.

employees are able to offer a variety of expertise that enables jobs
to be done effectively, improving productivity and reducing waste.

1. Describe what is meant by diversity and equality.
(2 marks)

disabled or disadvantaged groups. Tesco offers an interview

2. Explain which groups are particularly covered by
equality laws. (4 marks)

guarantee to candidates from Remploy, Shaw Trust and Whizz-

3. Analyse Tesco’s diversity strategy, explaining why it is

Kidz – three organisations that work with disabled people. This

important to the workforce, the customers and the

guarantee means that where Tesco has a vacancy and any of
these groups has a suitable candidate, he or she must be

business. (6 marks)
4. Describe the different network groups and

interviewed. The interview guarantee does not mean a job offer will

organisations that Tesco supports. Evaluate why each

be made, but in many cases applicants from these partners get

is of importance in helping the business be more

the job as they are the best candidate. Tesco also offers work

competitive than its rivals. (8 marks)

Exam-style questions

A key part of the strategy is Tesco’s aim to employ people from

placements to give candidates the experience of working in retail.
Tesco | Using diversity and inclusion to provide better service

87

TNT STUDY

29/8/12

10:34

Page 2

O P E R AT I O N S

Delivering a superior customer experience

Introduction

In-depth research showed that customer satisfaction depended
not just on the process of delivering the service, but also on how

The reputation of a business may be affected by what its

the service was carried out. This resulted in TNT adopting a core

customers think and say about its products or services. This is

strategy focused on delivering a quality customer experience. It

driven by the experience of customers when dealing with the

developed a two-year programme to implement and communicate

business. High quality customer service will encourage customers

its Customer Promise to employees and customers.

to become regular or repeat users or purchasers. On the other
hand, a poor customer experience may damage a business

In order to achieve the levels of process innovation and continuous

through loss of consumer confidence.

improvement that the customer focus strategy required, TNT also
needed to ensure the capabilities of its people were aligned to this,

TNT was founded in Australia in 1946 by Ken Thomas with a
single truck. Today, TNT is a global business and the market
leader in business-to-business (B2B) express delivery services,
delivering up to 150 million items per year. It has the largest
individual share of the national market and employs over 10,000
people across the UK and Ireland. TNT operates in the tertiary (or
service) sector of the economy which provides widely varying
services to other businesses and to consumers. The tertiary sector
is the largest sector of the UK economy, ahead of the primary
(extraction) and secondary (manufacturing) sectors.
In 2008 TNT recognised that the increasing expectations of
customers meant the business had to make major changes to
ensure it could meet their needs.

particularly in delivering a high quality customer experience. A review
of new employees to the company showed that only 10% held
qualifications above QCF (Qualifications and Credit Framework) level
2, compared to the industry norm of 52% (as identified by Skills for
Logistics Research).
This case study examines how TNT’s Customer Promise reflects its
core strategy of customer focus and aligns with its corporate
values to influence the organisation’s culture.

Why is customer focus so important?
Customer service is a series of activities designed to deliver
customer satisfaction. The process of providing customer
satisfaction is based on an understanding of what customers want
and need. Effective businesses aim to anticipate and meet or
exceed these needs. It also requires effective communication.
A high quality customer experience needs to apply from initial
contact through to after-sales care, whether the customer
generates a one-off transaction or regular repeat business.
There are many different aspects which underpin customer
satisfaction in a business. These include:
• ease of use – educating customers so that they know how to
get the best from the service or product and designing services
that are easy to use and access

88

Curriculum topics covered: • Customer focus • Customer satisfaction
• Benefits of customer focus • Measuring customer satisfaction

TNT STUDY

29/8/12

10:34

Page 3

• personal relationships – building a rapport with customers to

• supports TNT’s market-leading position

make them feel valued and that their needs are important, so

• helps to retain existing customers and attract new ones

that they develop an attachment to the service

• motivates staff by demonstrating their valuable input

• appropriate payment systems – enabling customers to pay in

• provides a means of differentiating the business.

ways that are convenient to them and at appropriate time, such
as on satisfactory completion of service
• an effective complaints process – dealing with any problems or

In order to achieve differentiation, TNT has embedded the company’s
values - ‘to be a trustworthy, values-based company with a

complaints promptly and making sure customers know of the

reputation for integrity, transparency and compliance’ - into its

outcome

Customer Promise. TNT claims: ‘Actions speak louder than words

• after-sales service – checking that customers have had a
satisfactory experience and offering other potentially relevant

and that when we say “Sure we can”, we mean it’. This ‘can-do’
attitude and positive mindset affect all aspects of TNT’s business.

services to extend the customer relationship.
The Customer Promise highlights the expertise and positive
The various elements of providing a satisfactory customer
experience should relate to customer needs. Relevant factors for
TNT customers involve:
• on-time delivery – TNT aims to deliver all documents, parcels
and freight to the customer’s required timescale through its
door-to-door integrated air and road network

mindset behind TNT’s strapline ‘Sure we can’. It shows that TNT
listens to customers and can add value. For example, TNT
promises a ‘friendly voice at the end of the phone’. To ensure this,
TNT’s own knowledgeable people deal directly with customers. Its
promise ‘to resolve problems promptly’ is demonstrated by how it
intercepts and repackages damaged parcels to avoid goods being
damaged and customers disappointed.

• 24/7 tracking – TNT’s sophisticated online technology makes it
possible for customers to track where their consignments are
at any time of day, giving them reassurance

Employees are instructed to be honest with customers – even if there
is a problem. This fulfils its promise ‘not to over-promise’. TNT aims

• personal attention – TNT can accommodate specific customer

for its drivers ‘to do you proud’ by training them so there is the same

requirements for safe delivery of unusual or fragile items. For

focus on quality customer service throughout the whole process. Its

example, on one occasion, the company transported a life-

promise ‘to look after you’ is demonstrated in a variety of ways: by

sized fibreglass Friesian cow from Scotland to a farm in

offering a range of delivery options such as door-to-door delivery as

Northern Ireland!

well as online booking which allows customers themselves to
reschedule deliveries where necessary to make things easier. Its

The customer experience at TNT

promise ‘to keep our promise’ is upheld by the fact that the standards
are set at the top by the managing director and communicated

TNT’s market is highly competitive. In TNT’s market there are at

throughout TNT so everyone is working to the same values.

least 13 direct competitors. TNT’s Customer Promise is designed
to deliver a competitive advantage, something that competitors

Other examples of practical changes to improve the customer

will find hard to copy. As well as providing a ‘superior customer

experience included an online ordering service for customer stationery

experience’, the Promise:

and an online invoicing option for those customers who want it.

www.thetimes100.co.uk

89

TNT STUDY

2/10/12

14:15

Page 4

TNT monitors and reviews regularly all activities relating to the

TNT encourages its people to ‘think on their feet’. They are

customer experience, both internally and externally, to ensure it

expected to seize opportunities and not just meet customer

remains fresh for both customers and employees.

requirements but also exceed them. This is part of the
organisation’s entrepreneurial culture. TNT encourages people to

Communicating the promise

make decisions for themselves (based around documented
procedures and values), rather than wait to be told what to do.

TNT’s people meet with or talk to customers on a regular basis.
They are the public face of the organisation and represent its
brand values. They hear first-hand what customers want or like.
TNT recognises that its Customer Promise will therefore only be
effectively delivered if its employees understand every aspect of
the customer relationship. Part of setting up the Customer
Promise involved communicating the change both within the
organisation and externally to customers:
• Employees received a letter from the MD announcing the
Customer Promise. TNT also arranged workshops to ensure
everyone had the same information. It organised a job
shadowing scheme so employees could understand how their
roles affected other staff and potentially the customer.
Alongside this, various communication tools were used to
refresh the messages for all employees. These included a
pocket guide, a key ring, posters, an internal magazine and
videos on the intranet.
• Customers received new literature. These included the MD’s
letter, an information pack for new customers and a regular
customer magazine, as well as direct mail about the Customer
Promise to 300,000 existing, lapsed and prospect customers.
TNT also set up a new feedback option on its website for
customers to give their views on the service.

This helps to give faster responses to customers. TNT also set up
an employee suggestion scheme, called I’dea. Employees can
make suggestions for improving working practices and TNT can
learn from its people as well as helping them to develop. This is
part of its two-way commitment model.

Recognising the people
behind the promise
Employees are one of the most important resources a service
organisation has and TNT’s ability to deliver on its Customer
Promise rests in its people. Effective organisations need engaged
people who have the skills to deliver the company’s aims and
objectives. This needs a two-way commitment. Employees need
to be committed to the organisation; the organisation needs to
support and reward its employees.
TNT recognises the contribution its people make in different ways.
First, it invests in developing people, offering a variety of career
options from driving to marketing. It carries out a training needs
analysis for new employees. This assesses their existing skills and
abilities in order to identify the training and development requirements
that employees may have in order to carry out their current roles
effectively. This also helps them to progress their career within TNT.
TNT provides the training people need to do the job (learning the
specific skills and knowledge required to work in the TNT way), as
well as opportunities for personal development. TNT was one of
the first 16 businesses to achieve Investors in People (IiP) status.

A can-do attitude becomes
the mentality of TNT’s people,
it influences the organisation’s culture
which in turn informs all the actions
involved in keeping the promises.
These actions provide evidence of
TNT’s superior customer experience
which customers will reward by
paying the right price.

This is an independently accredited standard awarded to
organisations that demonstrate commitment to people
development. Investing in people helps to increase customer
satisfaction and leads to more business.
TNT’s focus on enhancing people’s wider capabilities as
preparation for future roles in the company leads to a ‘win-win’
situation. Employees gain from good jobs with prospects. The
organisation gains from employing people who are able to
promote its brand values and deliver exceptional service.
Developing people helps to ensure the company has the right
skills in the workforce to improve performance today and grow the
business tomorrow.

90

www.thetimes100.co.uk

TNT STUDY

29/8/12

10:34

Page 5

www.tnt.com

High performing teams and depots receive recognition and
rewards through TNT’s awards schemes. TNT’s ‘Delivering More’
scheme rewards and recognises those employees who have gone
beyond the call of duty. Over 4,000 awards are made each year.

Conclusion
Effective customer service involves meeting or exceeding customer
needs. However, customer service is not just about what you do for
your customers, it also concerns how the service is carried out.
Examples of TNT’s training and development programmes include:

TNT monitors and measures performance to ensure its activities

• a foundation degree with Hull College – this is mapped to

are delivering the strategy. For example, it conducts telephone

national qualifications and focuses on the logistics industry.

interviews each week with a sample of customers to review their

This is a great example of workplace learning and bridges the

perceptions of its services and assess levels of customer loyalty.

gap between academic study and work
• a foundation degree with Coventry University – this is mapped

Since TNT’s strategy of focusing on the customer experience was

to national qualifications and focuses on management and

set up in 2009, it has delivered strong results:

leadership

• TNT has achieved the highest levels of customer satisfaction in its

• a five-year apprenticeship programme for young people in
vehicle maintenance – this ensures that TNT has the skills it
needs to keep its fleet up to standard.

market measured on 31 aspects linked to the Customer Promise.
• The Customer Promise programme has increased productivity
and generated savings overall of almost £660K.
• The company achieved its targets in 2010 and 2011 despite

TNT people are recognised in other ways. Employees are
encouraged to move between roles to learn more about the
company. This form of job enrichment means employees experience

the difficult economic climate.
• 100% of new operations employees will have a relevant
qualification, making TNT the industry leader.

variety at work and improve their skills in different areas.
TNT also offers the opportunity to develop and progress within the
company. Around 70% of supervisory roles are filled internally.
Graduates who start working for TNT are expected to take on
management roles within five years.

1. What is customer service? Give two examples of
different aspects of customer service. (2 marks)
Promise relates to customer service. (4 marks)
3. Using the TNT website, identify three additional
examples of ways in which TNT provides quality
customer service. (6 marks)
4. Evaluate how developing its employees enables TNT

Exam-style questions

2. Explain how each of the elements of TNT’s Customer

to benefit its customers. What drawbacks might there
be for the organisation? (8 marks)

TNT | Delivering a superior customer experience

91

UNISON STUDY

29/8/12

10:35

Page 2

PEOPLE

Developing responsiveness through organisational structure

This case study looks at organisational structures and how

Introduction

UNISON’s structure is designed to allow it to make decisions and
UNISON is the UK’s biggest public service trade union. It

respond to changes quickly in order to help its members.

represents 1.3 million members who deliver essential services to
the public. These are services that protect, enrich and change

The structure of an organisation

lives. Its members work in all areas of public service. They work in
hospitals, town halls, universities, colleges, schools, social services
and clinics. Most people in the UK rely on these services.

Organisational structure refers to how the workers within a
business are organised and how they relate to each other.
A visual representation of the structure can be shown in an

There are UNISON branches in all sorts of organisations in the UK.
As a trade union, UNISON represents and supports its members in

organisation chart. This shows who has authority over whom and
the different roles that workers carry out.

issues at work. It looks after their welfare and campaigns for changes
on their behalf. UNISON also has a role in local and national

Director

negotiations and in collective bargaining. This is where UNISON
negotiates with employers and groups of employers for all of its

Manager

members collectively. One of its key roles is in campaigning on behalf
of members. This could be for changes that will benefit members

Team Leader

Team Leader

such as better wages or working conditions or against policies that
threaten members’ jobs. UNISON therefore campaigns against

Supervisor

Supervisor

Supervisor

Supervisor

Operatives

Operatives

Operatives

Operatives

government spending cuts that will have a negative impact on public
services and those employed in this sector.
UNISON, on behalf of its members, has concentrated its
campaign efforts over the past two years on the future of public

Certain organisational structures suit particular types of

services and the challenges that they face from government cuts.

organisations. This will depend on the size of the business, its

Public sector cuts planned by the coalition government in 2012

aims and the way it sees itself (known as its corporate culture or

would mean more than 730,000 public service job cuts.

image). It may also be affected by factors outside of its control
(external factors) such as the nature and spread of its customers.
Structure is often linked to the type of business. For example, it
could be organised by:
• product - for instance, a chemical company could be split into
paints and plastics
• function - for instance, departments of finance, marketing,
human resources and operations
• geography - this could be by UK region or even internationally
e.g. Europe, Asia, America.

92

Curriculum topics covered: • Organisational structures • Culture
• Roles and responsibilities • Skills

UNISON STUDY

29/8/12

10:35

Page 3

Managing organisational structures
The type of structure that a business has reflects how it behaves.
It defines its culture or way of working. A highly centralised,
hierarchical structure means an organisation is run from the top.
It may have a well-known person at its head who makes most of
the decisions. A decentralised structure is likely to create a much
more democratic culture, where everyone’s opinion is valued.
Decisions will often be made by groups of people or in
consultation with different layers.
It is important for a business to choose a structure that helps it

The national structure of UNISON is centralised with many

operate efficiently. The structure should also help to achieve the

decisions affecting the whole union made by the senior members

organisation’s aims and objectives and make best use of people

and workers in the new UNISON centre. However, UNISON’s

and resources. The main types of business structure are:

culture is one of equality. It is a culture that gives people freedom

• Hierarchical (tall) structure. This means that the business is

to express their views and to be part of decision making.

organised in layers, with the higher layers having more authority

Therefore, some power is given to the regions so that they can

than those below them. The advantage of a tall structure is that

make decisions. Quite often the people in the regions will have a

every role is clearly defined. Decisions can be made quickly by

better idea of local needs. This decentralisation helps UNISON to

those at the top of the organisation but communication may be

be responsive at all levels.

slower as the message has to pass through all the layers.
• Horizontal or flat structures. Here there are fewer layers and
more people in each layer. Decision making may need to take
account of several groups within a layer. However,
communication is usually more effective. Flat structures often

‘I feel there is a genuine ‘no blame’ culture at UNISON. I
am able to contribute my opinions to the highest level and
be listened to and complimented on my work.’

work well with skilled and motivated workers.
• Matrix structures. Sometimes the business needs to use

Whatever the structure, there are certain key features that

people with a variety of skills who are drawn from many parts

are common:

or functional areas of the business such as marketing,

• Span of control – the people for whom a manager is directly

operations, finance and human resources. These can be

responsible. A narrow span means tight control; a wide span

organised into teams to complete projects.

can provide more opportunity for employees to contribute. This
can lead to better motivation. There are narrow spans of

UNISON has a complex structure that reflects the complex nature of
the work that it carries out. Its structure is split by function and by
region. UNISON’s 1,100 staff work in either its new centre on

control in tall structures and wide spans of control in flatter
organisations.
• Chain of command – how authority passes down the

Euston Road in London or in one of the 12 UK regions. Within each

organisation. It also shows who has power delegated (or

region there are employees responsible for different areas of the

passed down) to them.

union’s work. These areas include health, learning and development,
and local government and education. The members are organised
into branches throughout Britain and Northern Ireland. This tall
structure helps it to act quickly and respond to changes:
• The National Executive Council, which is elected by members,
can focus on policy and providing leadership.
• The UNISON Centre concentrates on providing a range of
services to members and the regions such as legal, financial
and personnel services.
• Regional employees can deal with issues particular to their
geographical area e.g. when a local employer announces
redundancies.
www.thetimes100.co.uk

93

UNISON STUDY

29/8/12

10:35

Page 4

• Accountability – who makes decisions and takes responsibility
for outcomes.

deliver its operational plan. Personal qualities required also include
skills in research, analysis and developing materials as well as

• Communication channels – the way in which messages are

communication and negotiation skills.

passed up, down and across an organisation. It is also vital
that the message is spread outside the organisation. For this,
UNISON uses cutting-edge communication techniques. At the
UNISON Centre for example, there is a media centre, plus
television and radio recording facilities.

‘The best part of my job as an area organiser is supporting
members and giving them the skills, tools, knowledge and
confidence to stand up for themselves and others. I get a
real sense of pride when I am supporting branches and
members through difficult times.’

Job roles within a trade union
Within most large organisations there are roles at different levels
within the hierarchy such as directors, managers, team leaders,
supervisors and operatives. UNISON is no different. The qualities
and skills needed for these roles are different. For example, those
at the top of the hierarchy will have to think more strategically and
may need greater leadership skills than those lower down.
UNISON’s job roles are specific to the aims of the union.

The regional organiser reports to the regional manager. This role
builds and organises branch memberships. Key responsibilities
involve supporting and mentoring activists, running regional
projects and managing the team. Regional organisers require
strategic thinking skills. They will also need to be able to manage
resources and teams of people.

National
official
Typical Regional
Organisation Chart
(Eastern region)

Regional
official

Assistant General
Secretary - Regional
Management &
Governance

Regional Secretary

Area
organiser

Area
organiser

Local
organiser

Local
organiser

Local
organiser

Local
organiser

Members

Members

Members

Members

Corporate
Services

Learning
and
Development

Health

Local
Government
& Education

Organisation

Private
Companies
& Police

Corporate
Services
Team

Learning
and
Development
Team

Health
Team

Local
Government
& Education
Team

Organisation
Team

Private
Companies
& Police
Team

The local organiser reports to the area level. This post recruits
and supports members at a local level. Personal qualities needed

The regional secretary is the senior official in the region. As

include:

regional manager, he or she leads the Regional Management

• problem-solving skills

Team and sits on UNISON’s Senior Management Group (SMG).

• communication skills

The SMG is chaired by the General Secretary. The role here is one

• ability to act on own initiative

of strategic and national development and communication of

• resource management

policies. This person needs leadership qualities to go with the high

• general understanding of issues facing trades unions and

level of responsibility. He or she needs high level problem-solving,

employers.

critical thinking and communication skills. The post holder will
typically have worked as a senior manager to develop these skills.

The area organiser reports to the regional level. This post

All roles include the need for some physical skills (such as lifting or

organises work across branches as well as region-wide

ability to travel) but, in accordance with equality policies, these can

campaigns and events. Responsibilities include representing

all be modified for anyone with a disability. Having a disability is no

members in negotiations and claims and helping the region to

bar to employment with UNISON.

94

www.thetimes100.co.uk

UNISON STUDY

2/10/12

14:16

Page 5

www.unison.org.uk

Conclusion
UNISON, as the UK’s largest public service union, has a
responsibility to support its members in the face of current
challenges. These include massive cuts to public services. This
means supporting not just members, but also their families and all
those who rely on public services.
To meet these aims, UNISON has a clear structure. Within this,
there are defined roles and responsibilities at each level. As a
person rises through the structure, they are expected to take on
more responsibilities. They will also have more authority – the right

Careers and training at UNISON

to make decisions. There is also a clear career path from one level
to the next so that organisers can rise through the organisation.

At the local level, a recent addition has been the role of ‘fighting
fund organisers’. Faced with huge cuts to public services,
UNISON is recruiting over 100 such fighting fund organisers.

‘UNISON makes a valuable contribution and difference to
the lives of working people, often at the most difficult times

These people need to have good analytical and presentation skills.

of their professional lives. I find it rewarding to work for an

They will undertake an induction training programme which

organisation whose aims I share and for whom I am

prepares them to go into workplaces and recruit members. These

prepared to go the extra mile.’

fighting fund organisers may come from a range of different
backgrounds and are central in taking the union in new directions.
Their jobs will include using new methods such as social

UNISON is keen to provide a good working environment, but also

networking to keep in touch with members. New roles such as

to face the challenge of supporting members. Its Investors in

this are helping UNISON to change its structure to focus more at

People Award shows its commitment to quality.

the local level. This makes the organisation more decentralised.
UNISON is also building clear career paths for organisers. Local
fighting fund organisers will recruit members, mentor stewards and
help branches to grow. To step up to area level management means
more responsibility. Area officials provide representation for members.
They also carry out bargaining with employers. These two activities
and experience provide a good launching pad for a regional role. At
regional level, jobs involve responsibility for large-scale negotiations,
leading projects and managing teams of organisers.

‘There are always new challenges, sometimes outside my
comfort zone, but training and support is given for this. It
makes me feel good about myself when I have tried

UNISON. (2 marks)
2. Explain the difference between what is meant by
‘authority’ and ‘responsibility’ within an organisational

This career path was designed to provide greater flexibility. It helps
the union to direct resources to where they are most needed.
When an employer suggests changes that will harm members –
such as redundancies or a transfer of services into the private
sector – a team of organisers can be on hand to work with the

structure. (4 marks)
3. Analyse the roles within a typical hierarchical structure,
using UNISON as an example. (6 marks)
4. Evaluate why UNISON’s structure is appropriate to the

Exam-style questions

something different.’

1. Describe what a trade union does with reference to

union, giving reasons to support your answer. (8 marks)

branch, supporting members in their workplace.

UNISON | Developing responsiveness through organisational structure

95

UNITED UTILITIES STUDY

29/8/12

10:36

Page 2

FINANCE

Using cost-benefit analysis to appraise investments

Introduction

including working with young people in schools from Year 9
upwards. United Utilities encourages the take up of Science,

Every morning millions of people in the UK have a bath or shower,

Technology, Engineering and Maths subjects in schools. It also

make a cup of tea and wash the dishes before they start the day.

emphasises the importance of learning about the environment.

Thousands of businesses use water in hundreds of different ways
– from hairdressers and hospitals to factories and farms. Yet most

In the period from 2010 to 2015 United Utilities will invest more

people do not consider where water comes from or where it goes

than £3 billion to improve the water and wastewater infrastructure

once they have finished using it.

and the environment across the North West. As a commerciallyoperated business which provides a public service, United Utilities

It is the job of United Utilities to bring three million households and

seeks to carry out all its projects in the most cost-effective way.

200,000 businesses in North West England an incredible 2,000

It embraces cost-saving innovations without compromising the

million litres of clean water each day – and take it all away again. It

service to customers. A breakdown of where this money is spent

then treats it to make it safe to go back into the environment

is illustrated below.

through rivers and the sea.
United Utilities has a licence to provide water and sewerage
services to around seven million people in North West England.

Water
treatment
& mains

Water
treatment
& mains

Ofwat, the economic regulator, is responsible for overseeing
companies like United Utilities to ensure they meet their

Improving
the quality
of our
assets

obligations to customers. These obligations include meeting
standards of service and charging fair prices. United Utilities also

Maintaining
our assets

has to meet strict environmental standards set by the Environment
Agency which manages discharges to the environment. These
relate to the water quality of rivers, shellfish and bathing waters
along the North West coastline.

United Utilities
spend between
2010 and 2015
> £3bn

Water
treatment
& sewers

Water
treatment
& sewers

Water

To deliver these services, United Utilities employs over 5,000

S&D*

skilled employees, from apprentices to graduates, with diverse
skills. These range from engineers, scientists and project
managers to operational colleagues running the treatment works.

Waste
water

*S&D = Supply and demand expenditure to meet population growth

Equally important are the frontline customer-facing employees and
those staff in support functions such as finance, HR and IT.

This case study examines one major wastewater quality
improvement investment made by United Utilities. This was for a

United Utilities has to consider how its decisions affect its various

bathing waters and shellfish waters project in Millom, a coastal

stakeholder groups including customers, shareholders, local

area in Cumbria in North West England. It shows how important

councils, MPs, the media and the wider community. United Utilities

non-financial considerations, such as the impact on the

recognises its responsibility to the community in many ways,

environment, were in arriving at the best decision.

96

Curriculum topics covered: • Cost-benefit analysis • Average rate of return
• Payback • Stakeholders

UNITED UTILITIES STUDY

29/8/12

10:36

Page 3

Drivers for investment

• Payback calculates the length of time needed to recover the
money originally invested from the cash generated by the

Businesses invest for many reasons, such as:

project. For example, if an investment of £200,000 is expected

• to grow an existing business. United Utilities expanded by building

to lead to cash flows of £25,000 per year, then the payback

new assets such as storage tanks and water treatment works

period is eight years.

• to replace and improve existing facilities. In United Utilities’ case,
this has involved upgrading or replacing sewers and water mains
• to meet legal or environmental requirements.

£200,000/£25,000 = 8 years

There were two main drivers for United Utilities to invest in the

However, United Utilities, when appraising any investments, needs

Millom project:

not only to consider the financial return on the investment but also to

1. European legislation. The European Union sets out regulations

assess the benefits to communities and the environment. These are

known as directives. The Bathing Waters Directive sets the

called external benefits. For United Utilities, the private benefits

standards for water quality where people may want to swim or

consist of the revenues from domestic and business customers. The

paddle. Similarly, the Shellfish Directive covers the quality of

wider external benefits include the benefits to local communities, to

water where shellfish may be grown and harvested. Only shellfish

nature lovers, to the environment (including bird and animal life), as

that are cultivated in clean water can be sent to market.

well as cleaner water.

2. Environmental factors relating to the quality of discharged
water. The Millom project was designed to improve the quality

Capital investment projects incur costs that need to be quantified.

of wastewater discharged back into the environment.

Internal costs are easy to determine, a major one being the cost of
borrowing money (for example, the interest on a loan). Added to this

United Utilities identified a need to improve its management of

are the direct project costs – these include materials, labour etc.

water and waste water in the area around Millom and the Duddon

However, projects can have negative effects on the locality. To arrive

Estuary. It aimed to combine engineering design with a

at the best decision for all relevant stakeholders, any project that

consideration of environmental factors to generate the best

United Utilities engages in requires a careful assessment of both the

solutions. This required working with a range of stakeholders to

commercial costs and revenues and the external costs and benefits.

determine the best possible investment decision. Stakeholders are

The bases for decision-making using cost-benefit analysis are

groups with an interest in a business decision.

summarised in the following formulae:

The investment decision was ultimately based on a cost-benefit
analysis. Cost-benefit analysis involves taking into account
both financial factors and wider social issues (including

Social benefits less social costs = cost-benefit analysis
Social benefit = internal (company) revenues + external benefits
Social costs = internal costs + external costs

environmental impact).

External factors
affecting investment appraisal

United Utilities is keenly aware of the social costs and benefits of

Any investment requires initial capital expenditure (capex).

invested more than £4,000 for every household in the North West.

Appraising an investment project involves weighing up the likely

The benefits of these investments include:

future return on that investment (ROI) against the expenditure.

• halving leaks from water networks

Methods often used include calculating the Accounting Rate of

• improved compliance with bathing water standards from 30%

Return and the Payback period:
• Accounting Rate of Return (ARR) is calculated as the average

its investments and always seeks to maximise the social benefits
whilst minimising the social costs. Since 1990 United Utilities has

to 90% across the North West
• improving water quality to the best that it has ever been.

annual profit that is expected over the life of the investment
project compared with the amount of capital invested. For
example, if the investment in a project is £200,000 and the
expected profit is £15,000 a year, then the ARR is 7.5%.

15,000/200,000 x 100% = 7.5%

www.thetimes100.co.uk

97

UNITED UTILITIES STUDY

29/8/12

10:36

Page 4

All possible solutions when costed out were over the original
budget. Therefore the partners in the plan engaged in a costbenefit analysis to identify which of the three options put forward
gave the best return against all factors.

As a project always has the potential for both positive and
negative external effects, United Utilities seeks to quantify these to
help select the best overall decision from its range of options. The
following sections show the basis for such decisions relating to the
Millom project. These include the costing criteria and how the
options specifically met stakeholder needs.

Investment for the Millom project
The original budget for the Millom project was set at £14.5m.
However, this was before a full evaluation of the social costs was
carried out. Having consulted with the Environment Agency,
United Utilities aimed to identify the best possible solution for its
shareholders, the environment, local communities and other
stakeholders. The key considerations were:
1. the initial capital outlay of the project (capex)
2. the ongoing operating expenditure from running the project (opex)
3. the wider costs and benefits to the environment and other
stakeholders.

Option
1. Small scale upgrade to the
site and using ultraviolet rays

The whole-life cost assessment of the solutions involved examining
capital costs of construction (e.g. concrete structures, pumps and
pipe work) as well as operating costs – e.g. power and chemicals
for treatment. Although option 1 had a significantly lower initial
capital outlay, originally United Utilities had discounted options 1 and
3 as the application of the technology was new to the company and
the regulator, so more data was needed to accept the solution. This
only left option 2, despite it being the most costly and potentially
having a negative impact on the environment.
However, United Utilities found positive evidence from colleagues
at Welsh Water to demonstrate how the ultraviolet treatment
processes could be used effectively. It then worked closely with
the Environment Agency to ensure the project minimised the
negative external costs and maximised the external benefits.
This resulted in United Utilities adopting option 1 as the most
innovative, cost-effective and environmentally beneficial option that
in some way satisfied all stakeholders. The key reasons were:
• It had the lowest capex and whole-life cost - the infrastructure
for option 1 can be contained within the existing
waterworks/treatment works site.
• Its carbon footprint and environmental impact was lowest - it
minimises the use of concrete and construction waste.
• When storms and heavy rain occur the excess water is treated
with ultraviolet disinfection and is discharged into the estuary.
This eliminates strong odours that would have affected the
local community and delivers benefits to the shellfish and
bathing waters.

Key elements

Whole-life cost

Benefits

Risks and issues

Lowest capex, but

£18.5m

Uses least land and

High power and other operating

lowest initial capex

costs. Uses a technique in a

higher opex

in tubes to kill bacteria in

new way for United Utilities and

wastewater to improve quality

the Environment Agency in the
North West

2. Create new large storage and
pipe work requirements

3. Major site upgrade and using
ultraviolet in tubes to kill off

Highest capex but

£22.8m

relatively low opex

Middle for capex
and opex

£21.3m

Confident that the

Over budget. Results in very

solution would work and

large concrete structures that

deliver the benefits

generate waste for disposal

Uses a little less land

Over budget. Uses a technique

than option 2

in a new way for UU and EA

bacteria

98

www.thetimes100.co.uk

UNITED UTILITIES STUDY

29/8/12

10:36

Page 5

www.unitedutilities.com

Working with stakeholders

Conclusion

In a public service industry like water, gas or electricity, it is essential

United Utilities is a major partner in the economic life of the North

to make investment decisions that respect the requirements of many

West. It manages huge reservoirs such as Thirlmere and

different stakeholders. United Utilities sought to find a solution that

Haweswater in Cumbria and treats the wastewater from homes

met with commercial criteria, met budget and also minimised

and businesses across the North West before disposing of it

negative impacts on the community. By working closely with the

safely back to the environment. It is committed, through

Environment Agency, United Utilities was able to come up with a

investments, to providing sustainable solutions to business and

socially and environmentally acceptable solution.

environmental challenges. The company recognises that quality
management begins at the start of the water production process

Stakeholders in the Millom project

Fishermen
in the Duddon
estuary area

Utilities keeps its catchment land as clean and sustainable

United Utilities
shareholders

as possible.

Employees

Stakeholders in
improving water
and waste water

Nature
lovers

and continues right down to safe discharge of wastewater. United

Local
communities

The
Environment Agency
(environment
regulator)

In the Millom project, United Utilities was faced with a number of
drivers requiring better water management to meet consumer

OFWAT
(economic
regulator)

needs, legislation and environmental demands. It responded by
identifying three alternative options and then working with the
Environment Agency to identify the solution which offered the best

In terms of satisfying stakeholders, United Utilities considered (and

value for money and long term sustainability.

by selecting option 1) fulfilled the following key requirements:
1. Convinced its own shareholders that the decision was good in

The use of cost-benefit analysis meant that the chosen solution

terms of financial criteria and maintaining the excellent

minimised financial costs and limited the impact on the local

reputation of the company.

landscape whilst giving acceptable benefits to shareholders,

2. Convinced the Environment Agency that wastewater would be

the local community and the environment.

treated to the required standards so that the EU directives
could be met in this area of the North West.
3. Demonstrated to landowners that their land rights would be

1. Describe how stakeholders affect a business and its

respected and that huge areas of land would not be taken

investments. (2 marks)
2. Explain the benefits of effective investment appraisal

4. Provided fishermen and consumers of shellfish with good

for the company and its stakeholders. (4 marks)

quality stocks and supplies.

3. Compare the advantages and disadvantages of using

5. Provided swimmers with bathing waters that are of a high standard.

a cost-benefit analysis of an investment rather than
using ARR or Payback alone. (6 marks)

The table below summarises the financial and environmental

4. Evaluate how you might carry out an investment

impacts considered as part of the investment appraisal in order to

project of your choice (e.g. a new school building or

assess the overall impact of the three options. This clearly shows

the development of a local sports centre) to take into

how option 1 provided the most effective balance of commercial

account a range of stakeholder interests. (8 marks)

Exam-style questions

away from them.

and environmental factors.
Capex (£m)

Whole-life cost (£m)

Carbon (tonnes)
from construction

Carbon (tonnes
per year) from
operating the site

1. Minor changes to site + UV treatment

15.8

18.5

5127

273

2. Storing wastewater in concrete
structures

24.0

22.8

8719

827

3. Major changes to site + UV treatment

22.0

21.3

6553

349

Option

United Utilities | Using cost-benefit analysis to appraise investments

99

ZURICH 2

29/8/12

10:36

Page 2

FINANCE

The benefits of budgeting

Introduction

Zurich’s ethos is underpinned by its core values:

Zurich Insurance Group is a leading global provider of insurance
services. Zurich’s mission is to help customers understand and
protect themselves from risk. The company employs 60,000 staff

Integrity

Openness, reliability and honesty

Customer centricity

Putting the customer first and at
the centre of all operations

Sustainable value creation

Generating value for customers
and shareholders on a secure,
long-term basis

Excellence

Quality in management, operations
and products

Teamwork

Pursuing strategy through sharing
expertise and ideas

and serves customers in 170 countries around the world.
Zurich offers General Insurance and Life Insurance products,
for example:
• General Insurance: car insurance, home buildings and contents
insurance
• Life assurance: life insurance, investment and pension plans.
Zurich offers its products to retail customers (mainly individuals)
and corporate customers (i.e. businesses).

A key component of Zurich’s values is corporate responsibility.
Life is full of uncertainty. The building you work in could catch fire.

Being a responsible company is fundamental to Zurich’s long-term

Your computer could be stolen. You may have an accident. These

sustainability. For example, Zurich Community Trust in the UK

are all risks with a small but real probability that they may occur.

actively helps over 600 charities make a difference to the lives of

Insurance provides protection against that risk. In return for a fee

thousands every year.

(a premium) it provides a financial payment in the event of
financial/personal loss.

Insurance is an extremely competitive market. Customers will
obtain quotes to find the best value either from Zurich directly or

So what makes Zurich one of the leading insurance companies? It

through a financial adviser. This case study shows how Zurich’s

starts with Zurich’s brand, reputation for quality customer service

careful approach to budgeting is a contributory factor in gaining

and solid financial strength. The insurance industry is tightly

competitive advantage.

regulated, requiring strict standards and highly skilled finance
professionals. Zurich, therefore, aims to attract the best graduates.

What is budgeting?
An organisation must earn enough revenue so that, after all costs
have been subtracted, there is a profit remaining. One of the most
useful financial tools is the budget. A budget is a business plan
expressed in financial terms. Budgets can be drawn up for sales,
costs or investment spending.
A budget will include a degree of prediction of performance which
is usually based on past data e.g. sales.

100

Curriculum topics covered: • Types of budgets • Setting a budget
• Using a budget • Benefits of budgeting

ZURICH 2

29/8/12

10:36

Page 3

It is important that it is a realistic financial plan that the business can

Benefits of budgeting

fulfil. Managers at all levels will have their own budget plans, designed
to co-ordinate with and contribute to the overall plan or master

Budgets are a financial representation of an organisation’s strategy.

budget. Therefore, managers need to be involved in contributing

The process of budgeting requires managers to plan ahead, for

information to the budget to which they will be committed.

example, to identify the resources required to meet targets. This is
particularly important in the insurance industry due to the complex

Budgets should be stretching but achievable. They should enable

nature of the products offered. Insurance generally addresses

companies to meet both short- and long-term financial and strategic

medium- and long-term needs of customers. Decisions taken now

objectives whilst providing motivational targets (potentially linked to

are likely to have financial implications for many years to come.

bonus payments) for managers to promote the right behaviours. All
budgets must be carefully monitored, reviewed and, if appropriate,

For example, in the UK, Zurich

re-assessed as internal factors (e.g. a major project costs

offers a protection product which

significantly less or more than expected) and external factors

provides a payment in the event

(e.g. regulatory developments) change.

of the death of the policyholder
to pay off an outstanding
mortgage. Typically, this product

Profit objectives are set by the company

offers protection for 15 to 25
years. Zurich guarantees a price
to the policyholder for the whole

Sales budgets are determined to allow profit
objectives to be met

term. If the outcome is different to that which was assumed when
the price was set (e.g. fewer or more deaths occur or fewer or more

Production budgets are drawn up which illustrate
the costs required to meet the planned sales

policies are cancelled than expected), Zurich will either make a profit
or a loss on that product. Due to the long-term nature of these
products any profit will emerge over many years.

Zurich has three core business segments: General Insurance (e.g.
car, home), Global Life (e.g. life assurance, pensions and

The budgeting process can be used for monitoring and control of

investments) and Farmers (core North-American business). These

financial performance. Results can be reviewed as frequently as

segments are divided into regions, for example Europe, and then

necessary against budgets to identify good and poor performance

into business units, for example UK Life. Through discussion with

areas. Managers need to investigate the difference or variance

various stakeholders, budgets are set for each business unit, with

between budgeted and actual results. Where actual figures are

the combined budgets supporting Zurich’s overall corporate aims.

worse than budgeted, these are called adverse variances. Adverse
variances may suggest problems. Where budgets are not being

For example, the table below shows the revenue and expense

met, action can be taken. Budget targets can be highly motivational

budgets for UK Life. The expenses budget is broken down by

and staff who meet or exceed budgeted targets may be rewarded

function. (All figures are for illustration only.)

with bonuses.

UK Life – Revenue and Expense budget (6 months to end June 2012)
JANUARY

FEBRUARY

MARCH

APRIL

MAY

JUNE

48

62

70

63

66

61

Sales

9

11

13

12

12

14

Propositions

6

7

8

7

8

9

Revenue budget 2012 (£m)
Expenses budget 2012 (£m)

Operations

14

19

21

19

20

22

Finance

4

5

6

5

5

6

IT

8

11

12

9

11

13

2

3

3

2

3

3

43

56

63

54

59

67

Control function
Total

www.thetimes100.co.uk

101

ZURICH 2

29/8/12

10:36

Page 4

Setting and using budgets
Having established the core financial objectives, often referred to
as key performance indicators, the strategies to achieve them can
be set in one of two main ways. The budgeting process can be:
• 'top-down' - i.e. set by senior managers and directed
downwards, often based on previous results
• ‘bottom-up’ - i.e. evolving upwards from middle managers,
through the use of detailed analysis, for confirmation by senior
management.

Challenges of effective budgeting

In practice, at Zurich
there are elements of

Suppose sales volume, prices and costs were all projected to rise

both approaches.

annually by 10% (incremental budgeting). This would make

Senior management

budgeting easy, but it is highly unlikely. To increase sales may

undertakes the top-

require price reductions and discounts. Successive rises in sales

down 'ambition

volume might bring economies of scale, but might need

setting'. This gives the

investment to expand production in order to meet that demand.

strategic context.

Senior managers
set strategy
and key
assumptions

Business
Partners

Managers then
Effective budgeting is full of challenges. Whilst financial accounts

consider historical

relate to the past, budgets are about the future. All data is therefore

data, prevailing trends

planned rather than actual, probable rather than definite. Budgets are

and any new drivers

based on a number of assumptions. Some of these are explicit, such

in order to formulate

as what the cost of labour and raw materials will be or what market

proposed budgets.

Middle managers
respond with
detailed
proposals*

Back to senior
managers
to confirm

* For each department

research results indicate about likely customer demand. Others are
more implicit. A change in leadership in the sales team, a good
relationship with a new supplier or changes in the organisation's
external environment could all affect budget projections.

Zurich Business Partners help to ensure 'joined-up budgeting'
between areas of the business:
• Revenue centres generate income. They prepare sales budgets.
• Cost centres generate expenses. They prepare operating or

Zurich may face unanticipated changes in legal or financial
regulations or a change in market dynamics brought about by
economic factors or the actions of competitors. An insurer needs to

production budgets.
• The profit budget draws together all the budgets for revenues
and costs to meet overall financial objectives.

predict the risks its insurance policies protect against, both shortterm risks, such as floods and earthquakes and longer-term risks,

An alternative approach to incremental budgeting is zero-based

such as mortality rates. Budgets also need to reflect the business’

budgeting. This means that each expenditure budget starts with a

need to invest in specific projects or long-term improvements.

zero allocation each year. Managers must justify each element of the
budget they propose. This has the advantage of making managers

Budgets may also cause conflict between departments. For

think proactively about what funds they need. It also avoids the

example, the allocation of additional budget to sales and marketing

tendency simply to add a percentage of the previous year’s budget

could result in operational areas receiving a reduced budget. Within

or assume that expenditure will remain the same. However, one

Zurich, conflict between departments is resolved with the help of

major disadvantage of this approach is the increased demand on

Business Partners. These work with the different departments to

staff time, which is an expensive resource with an opportunity cost.

achieve an appropriate and fair division of the budget, in line with
the business’ and senior management’s objectives.

The first results against budget may show that the business is not
exactly on target. The budget then becomes a ‘dashboard’ to

Analysing budgeting data may uncover opportunities that would

assess all the factors and make the necessary changes to reach

otherwise have remained hidden. Therefore budgets must be set

goals. Variance analysis is used to identify differences between

using the best information available but have flexibility in order to

budgeted and actual figures. This can be demonstrated using the

respond to the changing business environment.

illustrative expenditure budget for UK Life.

102

www.thetimes100.co.uk

ZURICH 2

29/8/12

10:36

Page 5

www.zurich.co.uk

UK Life - new business

UK Lifedashboard
- Expense2012
budget
£m to end-June)
£m dashboard 2012
(6 months
Expenses budget
YEAR TO DATE (end April)

FUNCTION

Budget

Actual

FULL YEAR OUTLOOK

% budget

Budget

Forecast

137

134

98

% budget

Sales

45

48

107

Propositions

28

33

118

82

100

122

Operations

73

64

88

229

212

93

Finance

20

19

95

60

55

92

IT

40

45

112

123

134

109

Control function
TOTAL

10

8

80

30

23

77

216

217

101

661

658

99

Trend

A deviation may be explained by an unforeseen event; it may be

KEY
Worse than a 10% adverse variance (i.e. >110% of an
expense budget or <90% of a revenue budget)
Less than 10% adverse variance
Favourable variance
Improving trend

the beginning of a major adverse trend that requires a counterstrategy. Analysing recent trends can act as an ‘early warning’
system and may indicate how the business’ performance will
evolve in the future.

Conclusion

Stable trend
Worsening trend

The Zurich brand is associated with trust and reliability. Quality is
at the heart of its customer appeal. However, it is also about

Results better than or on budget are ‘green’ and represent no
immediate problem. They may be worth investigation to
understand new practices or to exploit new opportunities. Results

innovation and being an industry leader, both in its operations and
responding quickly to emerging risks and opportunities. This
allows Zurich to deliver what matters when it matters.

that are only mildly outside expectations are 'amber'. These may

The budgeting process is a source of competitive advantage.

need attention particularly if there is a worsening trend. Finally,

Effective budgeting requires careful research and realistic planning

there are the adverse (‘red’) results. Red areas demand immediate

as well as collaboration. It can help to set high objectives or move

investigation and remedial action to bring performance back to

the business into new territory. The level of ‘stretch’ or challenge in

budget. All results should be investigated based on the level of

a budget will depend on an organisation’s culture and ambition.

risk each deviation poses to meeting the overall business goals,

Some businesses may be prepared to accept a higher risk profile

but priority should be given to red areas.

for a better return. This in turn will depend on the influence of key
stakeholders, such as shareholders.

Zurich Business Partners assist managers in understanding and
explaining current performance by identifying the root causes of

To ensure the company has the capability to achieve its aims,

any deviations from the budget. They also look forward – known

Zurich employs graduates and finance professionals who are

as forecasting – to assess how those deviations will affect the

skilled in managing and interpreting budget dashboards.

performance compared to the budget over the remainder of the
period and in the context of overall objectives.
1. Describe the main purpose of a budget. (2 marks)
meet overall financial objectives. (4 marks)
3. Using Zurich as an example, draw up a mind map to
show the internal and external factors affecting the
preparation of budgets. (6 marks)
4. To what extent is budgeting an effective tool for

Exam-style questions

2. Explain how an organisation’s profit budget can help it

business management? (8 marks)

Zurich | The benefits of budgeting

103

ZURICH STUDY 1

29/8/12

10:36

Page 2

O P E R AT I O N S

Creating quality customer care

Introduction

In a service industry many companies offer broadly similar
products. Quality is one way in which Zurich can differentiate its

Zurich Insurance Group provides insurance and other financial

services from those of its competitors. It puts delivering quality

services to both individuals and businesses. The group has more

customer service at the heart of everything it does.

than 130 years experience and is one of the world’s largest
insurance groups. It has more than 60,000 employees and

Zurich's ambition is to be the best global insurer as measured by

operates in over 170 countries. In the UK alone, Zurich has over

its customers, shareholders and employees. Zurich demonstrates

two million live policies and each month its Life business handles

its commitment to achieve its ambition through the Zurich Basics.

300,000 interactions with customers by telephone and mail, as

This is its code of conduct for all employees based around five

well as a further 300,000 email and internet enquiries.

core values – Integrity, Customer Centricity, Excellence,
Sustainable Value Creation and Teamwork.

Zurich products and services include insurance for properties,
accidents, cars and life. The aim of insurance is to help people and
businesses protect themselves financially if something goes wrong.
There can be major financial consequences if expensive assets like
buildings and cars are damaged. People need assurance that they
will not suffer if someone is unable to work, requires extensive
treatment or care because of an accident or dies.

This case study examines how Zurich brings quality to life in the
care it provides for its customers every day.

What is quality?
Quality can be described as ‘fit for purpose’. Note that quality
does not necessarily equate to ‘luxury’. For example, if someone
wants to hire an economical and easy-to-park car, then a model

The policy holder has the reassurance that if something goes wrong,
the consequences are managed and Zurich’s insurance will, at least
financially, help to put things right. In exchange for its customers
paying money in regular premiums (over a specified period of time)
Zurich promises that it will be there when it is needed.

such as a Smart car would adequately meet the customer’s need
so would be fit for purpose. Providing anything of a higher
standard would be an unnecessary cost. Quality is linked to what
the customer needs and expects. If a product meets these needs
and expectations, then it can be considered a quality product.
Quality is also linked to the target market of a business. The level of
quality required to be fit for purpose is different depending on the
types of customers a business deals with. For example, a customer
willing to pay £50 per night for a hotel room will have lower
expectations than a customer willing to pay £200 per night. However,
in both cases, the customer will consider whether the quality of the
room is fit for purpose based on the amount they have spent.
Quality is equally relevant to a service business as to a manufacturing
one. Zurich must therefore establish what its customers need and
expect. It must deliver on its promise to be there when its customers
need assistance efficiently and courteously.

104

Curriculum topics covered: • Quality control • Quality assurance
• TQM • Measuring quality

ZURICH STUDY 1

29/8/12

10:36

Page 3

The ability to meet customer needs and expectations and deliver

This is known as quality control (QC). This procedure is most often

on its core promise determines how customers feel about the

used in product manufacturing. The process involves testing a

Zurich brand. To ensure that customers have a positive

sample of the product as it comes off the production line.

experience, Zurich focuses on:

Putting things right at the end of a process is often costly. In a

• clearly identifying customer needs

manufacturing environment, extra items must be made to replace

• effective planning and processes

the faulty products. There will also be costs in terms of the staff

• putting in place the right resources (people and systems) for

time needed to put things right and other resources. For example,

the job

it may not be possible to recover or re-use the materials from

• providing in-depth employee training to ensure that all staff are

faulty products.

customer focused
• setting appropriate and achievable targets

In a service industry, a quality control approach is rarely enough to

• continuous measuring and monitoring of progress against

maintain standards. This is because many aspects of a service are

these targets.

only realised as they are delivered to customers. For example, an
insurance company can only deal with a claim on a policy when

Zurich has developed a way of helping its employees to deliver

the customer makes a claim.

quality consistently to customers and has called it iQUALITY. This
acronym is designed to help define what quality looks like at

This is why many businesses use other ways of managing quality.

Zurich. It reminds staff that quality is a key part of every interaction

One approach is quality assurance (QA). Quality is not simply

they have with customers.

considered at the end of a process but at every stage. Processes
or procedures can be measured against set standards or ‘best
practice’ benchmarks within the industry.

i
Q
U
A
L
I
T
Y

You, me , everyone
Question

Total quality management (TQM) is an approach that seeks to

Understand

ensure that all parts of a process are ‘right first time’. The aim is
for ‘zero defects’. A TQM approach requires every employee to

Act

take responsibility for delivering quality. TQM looks at improving

Lead

both the people and processes involved in the business through

Inspire

continuous improvement.

Teamwork
You

iQUALITY

Zurich’s approach to managing quality uses a combination of the
methods above. Firstly, it uses iQUALITY to embody the principles
of TQM, helping to bring this to life in the minds of its employees

Zurich recognises that quality is not a ‘one-off’ process. Its

so they apply it to the customer care experience every day.

commitment to providing a world-class service requires that it

Secondly, Zurich carries out regular quality sampling of the

continuously listens to its customers’ changing needs and

customer care it provides and the outputs it produces, e.g. letters

expectations. It puts in place the appropriate processes and

and benefit statements. The amount of quality sampling carried

people to meet these needs. Employees play a crucial role in

out depends on the level of the employee's experience and the

delivering quality service. Zurich encourages its staff to:

complexity of the task.

• ‘see...the benefits of getting things right, first time, every time
• hear...what our customers want, keep our promises and deliver
• feel…empowered and add value to the business and the
customer experience
• think…about how customers perceive Zurich.’

Managing quality
Quality can be managed in several ways. It can be measured at
the end of a process to make sure that any sub-standard
products do not reach customers.
www.thetimes100.co.uk

105

ZURICH STUDY 1

29/8/12

10:36

Page 4

For example, work produced by a new recruit may initially be
subject to QA whereas, for an experienced employee, quality
sampling will normally be carried out as a percentage of the work
they complete. If the quality sampling for the experienced
employee identifies a trend of errors, the percentage of quality
sampling may be increased.
In practice, it is difficult to remove errors completely from a
business process. To drive continuous improvement, what an
organisation can do is identify errors and put them right. Zurich
uses a process known as ‘root cause analysis’. This is a way to
find out why something went wrong and to find ways to stop it
from happening again. Zurich applies the ‘five whys’ approach to
root cause analysis. Staff involved in quality management look at
the 'trigger' that brings attention to the problem and then

It is also important for a business to capture and regularly review the

repeatedly ask 'why', probing deeper, until the true root cause is

results of its quality management processes against its own or

discovered. Once this is identified, Zurich can devise a suitable

industry-set benchmark standards. This can help to identify problem

solution to stop it happening again and then monitor outcomes to

areas and enable preventative steps to be taken to correct the

make sure that the solution is addressing the problem.

problem or prevent it from getting worse. Unidentified problems may
lead to inferior service which, in turn, could reduce customer
satisfaction. Zurich uses a quality framework to regularly review the
results of its quality measurements against benchmark standards.

Problem Why Why Why Why Why Cause

Resolve

A business may also use measures set by outside bodies such
the British Standards Institute (BSI) or against the performance of
other businesses in its industry. As a provider of financial services,
in the UK Zurich is regulated by the Financial Services Authority

For example, one issue facing Zurich was that it was receiving a

(FSA). This sets out rules and regulations covering all aspects of

number of similar complaints from customers about not receiving

the business, including the concept of Treating Customers Fairly.

payments promptly when their savings policies matured (came to

Zurich’s approach to customer centricity aims to go beyond the

an end). The complaints were the ‘trigger’ in this case. Using the

requirements and standards set out by the FSA and BSI.

‘five whys’ approach, Zurich found the root cause was that the
manual process for issuing claim packs and sending payments for

As a global business, Zurich aims to be the best insurer as

these policies was causing delays. Zurich changed the process so

measured by all its main stakeholder groups – its customers, its

that packs are now sent out earlier and the payments are sent out

shareholders and its employees. For a customer-focused business,

automatically 10 days before a policy matures. This ensures

levels of customer satisfaction are one of the most important

customers receive payment promptly. There has since been a

measures. Zurich aims to be in the top 25% of insurance providers

78% fall in complaints related to this issue.

for customer satisfaction. High customer satisfaction scores should
be reflected in repeat business and growth in sales. Zurich conducts

Measuring quality

extensive market research with large numbers of customers. This
helps managers to understand how far the company is meeting

In order to measure quality, a business needs to establish key

customer needs. Zurich also uses an independent measure called

measures to track how well it is meeting standards. It could, for

the TRI*M index. This assesses how well different parts of the

example, measure how many customers buy other products from

business are satisfying customer requirements.

the company (repeat business) or how fast it responds to
customer queries (customer response rates). Zurich’s UK Life

As part of its customer impact scheme, Zurich asks customers to

business deals with over half a million calls, emails and letters a

rate the company’s performance. Most recent results show that

month. Just 0.3% of these are complaints. Zurich is quick to

most customers rate Zurich as good, very good or excellent in the

respond to any complaints or issues raised by its customers.

three key areas aligned to its business objectives.

106

www.thetimes100.co.uk

ZURICH STUDY 1

29/8/12

10:37

Page 5

www.zurich.co.uk

Good quality should also be reflected in the bottom line – in sales
Developing and promoting products and services

74%

Giving clear information and good service at point of sale

94%

Maintaining effective relationships

82%

and profits. In many service industries, the quality of service is the
key factor that helps a business to outperform its rivals. High
levels of customer care create high levels of customer satisfaction

Another measure of how well a business is delivering on its
promises are awards from within its own industry. Recent awards
for Zurich include two Five Star Service Awards at the FT Financial
Adviser Awards. This followed an intensive voting process
involving 25,000 questionnaires – the biggest poll in the financial
services industry. Zurich also received an Outstanding
Achievement Award at the FT Adviser Online Service Awards 2011
in recognition of the way that it has maintained a level of
excellence since the awards began five years ago.

which can give the business a competitive advantage.
In the Financial Services industry, products and prices can appear
very similar to customers so customer care is the differentiating
factor between providers. Customers that have a positive
experience are much more likely to renew their policies, buy other
products and services and recommend the company to others.
Not managing quality could lead to disappointed customers who
could easily choose to take their business elsewhere. Zurich's
customer care sets it apart from others in the industry, maximising
potential to retain its customers.

Conclusion
A quality product or service is one that does what it is supposed
to do – that is, meet customer requirements for its target market.
For a business, therefore, quality is based on knowing what
customers need and expect and meeting these demands.
A business that is serious about quality does more. Zurich aims not
only to meet customer expectations, but also to exceed them. Zurich
puts quality at the centre of how it does business. It actively
manages and measures the quality of the service it provides to make
sure its customers receive the best possible level of customer care.

Benefits of managing quality
There are costs involved in setting up systems to manage and
improve quality. It requires staff to spend time in training or in
monitoring processes. It requires investment in quality
measurement systems. The costs of running large-scale customer
surveys are significant both in time and money. However, direct
feedback is essential in order that a business understands what its
customers think about its service and, importantly, what it can do
1. Describe what is meant by ‘quality’. (2 marks)

recognises that these costs are a good investment and that the

2. Explain why managing quality is important to a

benefits of managing quality outweigh these costs.

business. (4 marks)
3. Why do you think the iQUALITY and the ‘five whys’

Providing quality services delivers benefits to the business. It can
gain savings from having more efficient staff and processes, higher
productivity and fewer rework costs. Some benefits are harder to

approaches help to achieve quality customer service at
Zurich? (6 marks)
4. Evaluate the different ways that quality can be managed.

measure but also add value within the business, such as improved

Which of these do you think is most important to Zurich?

staff morale and motivation. These help to retain staff, build

Give reasons for your answer. (8 marks)

Exam-style questions

next to increase their loyalty. A quality-conscious business

experience within the business and save on recruitment costs.
Zurich | Creating quality customer care

107

BACK END OF BOOK

29/8/12

13:53

Page 2

Remember
- you can view and download all case studies and
associated resources from our website at:

www.thetimes100.co.uk
See the example lesson resources pack
on the following pages

108

www.thetimes100.co.uk

BACK END OF BOOK

29/8/12

13:53

Page 3

Example lesson resource
Training and development - Harrods
Summary case study
‘Harrods of London’ is a British institution. It is probably the most
well-known and respected retail store in the world. For 162 years,
Harrods has built its unique reputation supported by its key brand
values – British; Luxury; Innovation; Sensation; Service. Harrods
employs approximately 5,000 people from 86 different nationalities
who deal with up to 100,000 customers a day at peak times.
Harrods needs employees who can face the challenges that its
reputation and standards bring. It needs people who are looking
for an exciting and rewarding long-term career with responsibility
and prospects. Its challenge is to find (and retain) employees with
the right mix of skills and abilities, who can be developed to
become the managers of the future.
Training and development is vital to any business. Its purpose at
Harrods is to better the performance of employees to enable
Harrods to meet its business goals. For example, at Harrods the
Sales Academy develops employees’ sales skills, leading to

Development is more about the individual – making him or her

increased sales when they return to the shop floor. Allowing

more efficient at a job or capable of facing different responsibilities

employees to acquire new skills, expertise and qualifications

and challenges. Development concentrates on the broader skills

supports employee progression which leads to increased

that are applicable to a wider variety of situations, such as thinking

motivation. This supports Harrods’ retention strategies. Training is

creatively, decision-making and managing people. In short, training

about gaining the skills needed for a job. These may be learned at

is typically linked to a particular subject matter and is applicable to

the place of work (on-the-job) or away from work (off-the-job). On-

that subject only, while development is based on growing broader

the-job training tends to be more cost-effective and relevant.

skills which can be used in many situations.

However, off-the-job training is usually carried out by professional
trainers. It also occurs away from the distractions of work. Training

Harrods employees come from diverse backgrounds and different

tends to have very specific and measurable goals, such as

nationalities. They have differing levels of competency, education

operating an IT system or till, understanding a process or

and experience. Harrods offers comprehensive Learning &

performing certain procedures (for example, cashing up).

Development opportunities. These opportunities are offered at a
variety of levels to suit the needs of all Harrods employees. These
range from workshops for Sales Associates and Warehouse
Operatives to developmental programmes for senior managers.
Amber is a Harrods Retail Manager who started as a Sales
Associate at Harrods through an online application. Harrods
Learning and Development ensured Amber acquired the skills she
needed to carry out her role. Development at Harrods is linked to
the company’s Business Competencies. Learning is offered offthe-job in ‘bite-size’ sessions. These sessions give employees the
chance to learn more effectively over a much shorter period,
reducing time away from work and bringing a tightly focused
approach to skills development. All the Business Competencies
are supported by self-help guides which are run either on-or offthe-job and include activities such as observation and review,
reading and ‘one minute guides’ offering top tips and tactics. The
sales and service programmes include the ‘Harrods Welcome’.
This induction provides essential training for new employees.

www.thetimes100.co.uk

109

BACK END OF BOOK

29/8/12

13:53

Page 4

Example questions
Training and development - Harrods
1. What is training?

4. Analyse why training and development are so important for
organisations like Harrods.

2. Describe how development differs from training.

Task
For each job role below, explain whether on-the-job or off-the-job
training would be best (or a combination of both). Write a report of
your recommendations, in each case justifying your decision and
describing what the training would entail:
• A trainee hairdresser
• A council worker employed to keep the local parks tidy and safe
• A librarian
• A trainee doctor

What have you learned?
Flash cards – create a set of flash cards for use when revising the
topic of training and development. You should have a question on
one side of the card and the answer on the other side of the card.
3. Explain the terms ‘on-the-job’ and ‘off-the-job’ training, giving
examples from Harrods.

110

Once completed, pair up with another student and use the flash
cards to test each other.

www.thetimes100.co.uk

BACK END OF BOOK

29/8/12

13:53

Page 5

Example teacher guide
Training and development - Harrods

Where does the lesson fit?

3. Explain the terms ‘on-the-job’ and ‘off-the-job’ training,
giving examples from Harrods.

This session would fit in a Human Resources module to introduce

On-the-job training takes place in the work place. At Harrods

the concepts of training and development. It could follow sessions

this can take the form of observing other colleagues. Off-the-

on recruitment and selection and may be followed by learning

job training occurs away from the workplace. The bite-size

about retention or motivation.

workshops offered by Harrods are examples of off-the-job
training.

Suggested resources & activities
4. Analyse why training and development is so important for
Related to Harrods and Training and Development.

organisations like Harrods.

• Full Harrods case study

Training and development is important for Harrods because:

• Training and Development PowerPoint

• It helps to meet business goals e.g. sales targets

• Staff Retention lesson resources

• It increases motivation

• Harrods crossword

• It helps Harrods to retain its staff

• Harrods word search

• It helps maintain its reputation for quality
• It employs workers from many different backgrounds with

Suggested timings for the session
10 mins

Starter e.g. Harrods word search

5 mins

Use the Training and Development PowerPoint

differing skills and qualifications.

What have you learned?

to discuss the topic

Expected learning is likely to include:

5 mins

Read the case study

• Definitions of training and development

10 mins

Questions

• The meaning of on and off-the-job training and induction training

20 mins

Task – training report for different job roles

• Advantages and disadvantages of both on and off-the-job training

10 mins

What have you learned?

• The importance of training and development for organisations

Answers to questions
1. What is training?
Training involves acquiring new skills and knowledge in relation
to a current role. It is concerned with the present and the
needs of the job role.
2. Describe how development differs from training.
Development differs from training because it relates to a
person’s potential to acquire wider capabilities. It is more
concerned with the future and the needs of the employee.

www.thetimes100.co.uk

111

BACK END OF BOOK

29/8/12

13:53

Page 6

Example PowerPoint slides
Training and development - Harrods

112

www.thetimes100.co.uk

BACK END OF BOOK

29/8/12

13:53

Page 7

Example PowerPoint slides
Training and development - Harrods

www.thetimes100.co.uk

113

BACK END OF BOOK

29/8/12

13:53

Page 8

Example crossword
Training and development - Harrods
Name:

1
2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Across

Down

2 Senior managers at Harrods have come from all walks of life
and started out with various levels of
3 Harrods has built its unique

.
supported by its

1 A range of activities provided by a retailer designed to meet the
needs of customers.
4 Employee

leads to increased motivation.

key brand values.
5 Process of being taught work-related knowledge and skills.
7 Capability arising from practice and experience.
6 Training undertaken within the organisation whilst in the course
8 Strategies Harrods has put in place to keep its talented

of doing the job.

managers.

Possible answers
Customer experience • On-the-job • Progression • Qualifications • Reputation • Retention strategies • Skills • Training

114

www.thetimes100.co.uk

BACK END OF BOOK

29/8/12

13:53

Page 9

Example word search
Training and development - Harrods
Name:

Words can be found across, up, down and diagonally.

P

A

N

V

C

J

U

P

S

N

T

P

L

-

R

J

I

R

E

K

M

A

J

E

J

M

K

-

G

M

O

J

F

V

S

-

-

A

N

P

V

C

L

C

H

N

F

V

F

-

I

C

-

L

S

M

F

K

F

R

U

C

M

F

O

J

G

K

V

C

V

I

F

A

A

N

A

J

O

V

M

V

N

L

A

S

J

T

F

G

H

N

E

F

-

A

R

R

F

G

F

F

N

C

V

E

U

U

K

J

U

T

-

K

I

F

O

L

U

B

E

E

E

S

I

L

M

N

K

L

H

I

K

T

C

H

T

C

I

N

R

M

K

E

E

T

A

R

G

E

T

S

T

G

L

T

M

C

P

C

H

K

B

S

G

V

R

V

B

A

B

R

J

C

L

C

V

L

V

T

V

-

C

-

N

O

O

T

F

P

C

A

A

I

T

A

M

G

E

E

S

U

U

L

T

P

S

S

A

L

U

E

R

T

M

B

V

N

J

J

H

A

U

T

N

-

O

R

R

N

A

K

I

B

P

O

U

E

O

F

F

-

T

H

E

-

J

O

B

I

E

N

K

U

O

B

O

G

G

O

L

B

T

R

A

I

N

I

N

G

I

U

L

P

K

E

T

F

G

F

T

R

E

C

R

U

I

T

-

F

E

M

T

F

-

B

U

F

K

B

R

R

S

E

E

I

M

L

R

V

V

B

H

S

A

R

S

U

B

T

I

F

H

K

N

O

E

S

I

A

G

A

N

C

A

R

E

E

R

P

E

S

A

L

B

G

S

G

U

M

S

M

T

G

R

U

H

R

T

H

C

C

K

F

O

T

V

-

A

U

P

J

K

I

K

R

O

V

V

J

S

C

I

P

C

H

V

T

I

N

G

V

L

K

A

A

O

C

F

P

H

A

S

I

N

N

O

V

A

T

I

O

N

-

A

V

O

L

I

N

P

I

E

R

-

A

C

P

O

V

N

B

C

E

N

I

R

G

M

B

H

M

K

T

S

R

P

E

L

E

J

T

V

C

F

I

S

G

S

E

Career

Career progression

Innovation

Motivation

Recruit

Reputation

Retain

Skills

Targets

Training

Off-the-job
